\section{Antisystemic resistance of historical challengers: the antimining movement of the indigenous-cholo Andean peasantry}

The formation of the class structure of the modern world-system is founded on the racialized international division of labor produced by colonization as a policy of expansion of merchant capital. Around ten million “indigenous" survived the genocide planned in Los Andes of an estimated total of sixty five million exterminated over the continental “America", being sublimated as inferior beings and reduced to mere labor force by the colonization method of primitive accumulation (Marx [1886]1976:873–875, 914; Mariátegui, January 16, 1929:78; Quijano and Wallerstein 1992; Quijano [1999], 2007, 169-170; Mignolo 2011, 183–84).

The world no longer fit into the consciousness of the survivors. But in their collective consciousness a myth survived. Or a myth makes sense in our consciousness, it is the myth of the new indigenous, of the Inkarri (the Inka return), of the Yawar-Inti (Sun of Blood) and the resurgence of the “indigenous" world by a revolutionary vendetta. In opposition to Arboleda's (2020) interpretation of the formation of indigenous “identity politics"\footnote{Martín Arboleda stated: ““Already in the 1990s, before socalled “identity politics” gained prominence in international academic circles, Ecuadorian philosopher Bolívar Echeverría—a renowned theoretician of cultural syncretism and capitalist modernity in Latin America—was already puzzled by the self-defeating cultural essentialisms of emerging variants of Latin American indigenous politics. Pre-Hispanic cultures in the Americas, he argued, were undergirded by profoundly relational cosmologies and hence were unable to perceive the “Other” as independent alterity. The otherness they perceived in the Spanish colonizers was for them a mere variant of the sameness of their own collective self. The European mindset, on the other hand, always construed the cultural other in terms of radical alterity, as absolute negation of their own identity” (Arboleda 2020:210).}, I argue that the revolutionary subjectivity that conjures up indigenous socialism is a historical formation in movement, a block of living historical text clashing, developing the peasantry as an antagonist class in formal subsumption since the sixteenth century. 

For both Arboleda (2020) and Bolívar Echevarría, the indigenous peoples could not understand the antagonism between them and the Spaniards. Their cosmology, they believe, did not allow the indigenous to realize that they were being killed by an external collective antagonistic to their lives or “collective self." If someone follows that argument, by implication this indigenous “self-defeating cultural essentialisms" would only change with the later appropriation of Hegelian logic as the basement for the reproduction of the sublimating rationality of “European mentality". By implication, its since the encounter of the “indigenous" peoples with this “European mentality" that their descendants are able to interpret “the cultural other in terms of radical otherness, as an absolute negation of its own identity". In short, it must be understood that Bolívar Echevarría should have ideologically omitted the work of the Peruvian anthropologist Luis E. Valcárcel, so as not to force an approximation to the work of José Carlos Mariátegui, who found an indigenous revolutionary subject already in motion when they were going to work on its politicization at the beginning of the twentieth century. Fortunately, the work of Alberto Flores Galindo ([1985]2010) did justice to this problem by tracing the myth of the Inkarri in indigenous and popular struggles emblematic of the history of Peru. 

As the first worker-intellectuals became the prophets of this myth, indigenous socialism was forged in the early twentieth century as the convergence of the “cholo group"\footnote{The “cholo group" is a social stratum which formation arises from the mass of the servile or semi-servile indigenous peasantry, differentiated by the incorporation of elements of Western-Creole culture. However, at the same time, they sustain, preserve, and recognize their difference and their origins in the indigenous culture and in the social structure of the indigenous peasantry, as the social formation from which we depart (Quijano 1980:63-65).} with the indigenous peasantry in historical resistance. The work of socialist politicization undertaken by Mariátegui, Mayer and Valcárcel (among others) in the organization of the bases of socialism in Peru and in the creation of indigenous socialism, they found already in motion the myth of indigenous resurgence. In which framework of interpretation, the revolution is carried out as vendetta for the new indigenous, their remnants, their sons and grandsons. The socialist revolution as a movement and horizon was already operating in Los Andes, when El Amauta José Carlos Mariátegui and the cholo group which he constituted with other intellectual workers of the proletariat in formation, began their work of politicization. 

Mariátegui wrote in the prologue to Valcárcel's Tempest in the Andes (1927): “I remember the unexpected and impressive type of agitator I found four years ago in the indigenous from Puno, Ezequiel Urviola. This meeting was the greatest surprise that Peru had in store for me on my return from Europe. Urviola represented the first spark of a fire that was to come. He was the revolutionary indigenous, the socialist indigenous. Tuberculous, hunchbacked, he succumbed after two years of tireless work. Today it does not matter that Urviola does not exist. It is enough that he existed. As Valcárcel says, today the mountains are pregnant with spartacus" (Mariátegui in the prologue to Valcárcel 1927:11).

The history of the class struggle in the Andes definitely precedes socialism, but most important, the indigenous-cholo peasantry learned to instrumentalize it. Thus, by the first quarter of the twenty-first century, the indigenous-cholo peasantry has not only effectively instrumentalized socialism (and Marxism) but also environmentalism (Mejía 2021), fixing its discursive articulation on the recognition of sensitive entities such as mountains, rivers, and lagoons (de la Cadena 2020). As De la Cadena emphasized about the visionary work of José María Arguedas: “[t]he totality, Todas las Sangres proposed an alternative indigenous social movement, a critical ally of the modern left, but with its own a-modern hybrid logic. Literacy and modern politics were important, but they had to be used and translated selectively, rather than eradicating indigenous customs" (2005:18). 

Hybridity in this sense is performative and not a reproduction of Western modernization as acculturation, but rather the cholos as indigenous descendants have been building their own cultural logic that recognizes their origins, while appropriating Western-modern cultural objects, as we do with the socialist and ecological frames of interpretation in the anti-mining and mining struggles of the twenty-first century. As evidence the three case studies: i) the cholo-peasantry antimining struggles in Cajamarca (Peru) during the 2004 and 2011-2012 against the Newmont Gold Mining Corporation headed in the U.S., ii) the indigenous-peasantry mining struggles in Apurímac (Peru) during 2015 and 2019 against the MMG of China Minmetals Corporation (CMC), and iii) the indigenous-cholo peasantry antimining struggles in Cotopaxi (Ecuador) during 2023-2024 against the Atico Mining Corporation headed in Canada. The cholo-indigenous peasantry updated their interpretation of mining from a class perspective, nurtured by ecological discourses and indigenous cosmopolitics (de la Cadena 2020) in the defense of water, land, life and biodiversity.
## The Historical Resistance of the Cholo-Indigenous Peasant Struggles Against Imperialist Mining in the Andes
\subsection{The Historical Resistance of the Cholo-Indigenous Peasant Struggles Against Imperialist Mining in the Andes}
 
Imperialist mining is a central productive and hoarding process for the extended capital reproduction of the most advanced economic formations of the imperialism world-economy in competition for their inter-“nationalization"./footnote{This concept is widely explained in the next section.}
Although the institutional and military foundations of imperialist domination in Los Andes were settled with implantation of the monopolistic finance capital of the most centralized bank capitalists state trusts of the U.S., through extractive enclaves on the most profitable industries of ours (Andean) semi-colonial "national-economies" during the period 1895 to 1930 (citar Cueva y Quijano ademas de mariategui). From the beginning of the twentieth century, the mining industry in the Andes was under the almost exclusive control of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie. Mining was one of the industries where capitalism developed most rapidly, especially in the Andes, where from 1895 monopoly capital was directed toward large-scale mining, oil production, and agriculture Peru (Mariátegui 1928:21:REVISAR; Quijano 1988:116-21).

In fact, the mining struggles of the central Peruvian highlands workers unions were executing active antisystemic resistance since their genesis in the first miners strike against the Cerro de Pasco Corporation (CPC) of January 7, 1919 - inspired in the advancements of the proletariat in Europe and the Soviet Revolution of October 1917 (Melgar Bao 2020, 132)- until the end of the 1980s.  The processes of union formation and politicization of the mining proletariat of the central highlands of Peru went through a trajectory of radicalization during most of the twentieth century. This trajectory of radicalization diffused to the medium and small mines at the national level, as well as to the mines of the southern highlands –as was evidenced by the massacres of 1957 and 1966 in the mines of Toquepala (Moquegua) exploited by the Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC)–. Mines opened for the "nationalization" of the finance capital of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie through the Cuajone contract, secretly signed by the "nationalist" military government of Velasco Alvarado.\footnote{The Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC) was founded in 1952 by the American Mining and Smelting Company (ASARCO), which at the first decade of the 1900s operated the mining reproduction circuit of the finance capital bearers, as the Phelps Dodge Overseas Capital Company, the Cerro de Pasco Corporation (CPC), and the Newmont Mining Company, which concentrated already by 1901 20% of copper melting and 15% of copper refinement at a world-scale (Pérez-Jiménez 2018:490). Evidencing the continuum of exclusive monopolistic operation of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisies centralized formations in Peru during the complete twentieth century.}

While during the 1980s, the co-optation of the mining workers unions of the Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC) was consolidated as a result of the enforcement of its institutionalization trajectory. Meanwhile, the intensity and harshness of the militarism executed against the protests of the mining workers in the central Peruvian highlands exploited by the Cerro de Pasco Copper Corporation (CPC), evidenced the disruptiveness of the transgression carried out by the mining workers struggles as a direct challenge to the main reproduction circuit of capital accumulation. The systematic application of his militarism policy over the copper mines of the central highlands of Peru since 1903 was evidenced by the massacres of Malpaso (1930), Cobriza (1971), as well as the militarized repression of the miners' strike campaign of the mid-80s, repressed with the imprisonment of hundreds of unionized miners. and the assassination of Saúl Cantoral in 1988 by the "Rodrigo Franco Commando" task force, a paramilitary criminal organization for annihilation that operated under the first government of Alan García.

However, the radicalization of the miners' protests developed in the face of militarized repression. The formation of a vanguard of the Peruvian proletariat in open confrontation with the U.S. imperialist mining bourgeoisie, developed until the 1980s, when the PCP-SL and the MRTA began armed struggles in Peru. The trajectory of radicalization of the struggles of the miners became an anti-imperialist challenge, operated in a context characterized by the escalation of the armed struggle in Latin America, and mainly by the resolution of the imperialist struggle between the U.S.S.R. and the U.S., defined by the consequences of the Sino-Soviet secession.

The formation of the basis for the horizontal centralization of Sino-American finance capital developed, gradually after the shared imperialist resolution of the Vietnam War, and the subsequent implementation of market reforms in China by Deng XiaoPing in 1978. Until the early years of the 21st century, marked by the September 11 attacks on Wall Street, the Pentagon and the White House. When, under conditions of shared imperialism, these financial capitals begin a process of separation and rupture, gradually reducing their horizontal centralization. Thus, constraining the inter-"nationalization" of U.S. bank capitals as finance capital circulating through the economic formations of China's industrial production.

Indeed, U.S. and China imperialists bourgeoisies share the conditions of accumulation for their mutually consented capital concentration and inter-"nationalization" in the period between the 70s and the first decade of the 2000s, with a breaking point in 2008 denoting the asymmetry of their rates of profit, considering as an indicator the money-capital amount accounted for its gold reserves, as surplus-value congealed under the shape of gold-commodity-capital and gold-money-capital at the same time (Figure 4).

The advanced inter-“nationalization" of the Chinese finance capital during the 2000s executed by a higher centralized China state capitalists trust, gradually took advantage of the institutional and military conditions established by the U.S. imperialists bourgeoisies to operate in Peru. In twenty years, China's state capitalists trust finance capital built a considerable expansion of its participation in Peruvian copper mining, although still incipient in gold mining, through the China Minmetals Corporation (CMC).

The differentiated imperialists mining bourgeoisies are in the core of the inter-"nationalized" organization of finance capital, subjugating the industrial mining production of the semi-colonial "national-economies" in Los Andes, to the whole circuit of reproduction of the highest economic formations resultant from different trajectories of centralization at a "national-economy" scale. Correspondent to the higher levels of capital concentration of the imperialism world-economy, since the transition from Great Britain to the U.S. modern world-system hegemony, around the first years of the "long twentieth century".

Under this situation of shared imperialism in Los Andes, a political regime of militarism and terrorist state violence is indiscreetly instrumentalized to guarantee the maximums rate of surplus-value and rate of profit for the top-layer economic formations at a world-scale. Nevertheless, the horizontal decentralization of Sino-American financial capital have differentiated effects for the accumulation circuit of each imperialist bourgeoisie, according to its own levels of concentration and centralization. In addition, the effects on a world-scale of the advanced horizontal decentralization of Sino-American finance capitals, exhibit differentiated consequences on the systemic structural processes of production and circulation, giving shape to the next transitory formation that necessarily will imply a new international division of labor.