Public engaged humanities raised 1500 higher education initiatives in the U.S. addressing society affairs in a range of ways. The contribution of the article is mainly to offer 5 types of engaged public humanities research based initiatives  built from its compilation.
The first type, outreach initiatives, are oriented mostly to the unidirectional knowledge-sharing from the university to the community partners. However, as the author recognized, the work of students and faculty in this type of initiatives necessarily shift their own professional practice. Non-exempt from the transactional effects of the participation and feedback of the community partners as non-passive audiences, shaping the interventions of students and faculty over the programmed goals, activities and outcomes. Is usual to find outreach initiatives as components of broader programs on engaged humanities scholarship.
The second type, engaged public programming initiatives, is oriented to share and discuss concerns about mutual interests among faculty or students and community partners. The third type, often labeled also as action-research, imply the shared creation of knowledge between higher education facilitators and community partners. The fourth type, engaged teaching, integrate public engagement components as project-based learning courses into undergraduate and graduate curriculum. Preparing students to approach a variety of career paths involving public engagement teaching, by learning critical skills from their publicly engaged scholarship. The last type of initiatives suggested by the author, infrastructure of engagement, can involve the provision of institutional support and resources involving fundraising, institutional recognition, training programs for certification, participation in research centers and scholarly societies, events and conferences.