
The metabolic structural processes of the world-economy produced historical antisystemic resistances with world-scale effects over capital extended reproduction. The history of the Andean indigenous-cholo peasantry against imperialist mining constitute a political identity in absolute contradiction with the dispossession and destruction of land and water as vital values for their social reproduction. While theory has been developed about the antisystemic effects of social movements created by the systemic processes of the world-economy, theorizing about the causal mechanisms that can explain them is a work in progress, permeable to be developed broadly within a Marxist critique of imperialism political economy.
In this article, a causal mechanisms hypothesis was built to explain the world-scale effects of antimining struggles over the capital reproduction of the imperialist mining bourgeoisies, from three case studies: i) the cholo-peasant anti-mining struggles in Cajamarca (Peru) during the 2004 and 2011-2012 against the Newmont Gold Mining Corporation headed in U.S., ii) the indigenous-peasant mining struggles in Apurímac (Peru) during 2015 and 2019 against the MMG of China Minmetals Corporation (CMC), and a third case of indigenous-cholo peasant anti-mining struggles in Cotopaxi (Ecuador) during 2023-2024 against the Atico Mining Corporation headed in Canada. The theory-building case studies conducted have been nurtured by fieldwork, archive research, and protest event data analysis to trace the evidence supporting the antisystemic effects hypothesis proposed for further testing.
\end{abstract}

Los procesos estructurales metabólicos de circulación y producción de la economía-mundo produjeron resistencias antisistémicas históricas con efectos a escala mundial sobre la reproducción del capital. Las luchas del campesinado indígena-cholo andino contra la minería imperialista desarrollaron un sujeto político en absoluta contradicción con el despojo y la destrucción de la tierra y el agua como valores vitales para su reproducción social. Si bien se han teorizado los efectos antisistémicos, la teorización sobre sus mecanismos causales se ha retrasado. En este artículo, construí una hipótesis del mecanismo causal para explicar los efectos a escala mundial de las luchas antimineras sobre la reproducción del capital de las burguesías mineras imperialistas a partir de tres estudios de caso: i) las luchas antimineras cholo-campesinas en Cajamarca (Perú) durante los años 2004 y 2011-2012, ii) las luchas mineras indígenas-campesinas en Apurímac (Perú) durante 2015 y 2019, y un tercer caso de luchas antimineras indígenas-campesinas cholo en Cotopaxi (Ecuador) durante 2023-2024.

\begin{keywords}
Peru; Ecuador; Antimining; Antisystemic; Capital reproduction; Mining; Imperialism 
\end{keywords}

\section{Introduction}
The modern world-system structural processes producing antisystemic resistances are vital for the extended reproduction of capital in the current world-economy.
The effects of antisystemic resistance in Los Andes executed by the antimining movement evidence an advanced point of the development of class struggle toward the identity formation of historical challengers in absolute antagonism with the capital reproduction of imperialist bourgeoisies. 

The development of the processes of production and circulation of colonial and imperialist mining, and gold mining in particular, systematically structured the historical resistance of the Andean indigenous and cholo peasantry against the expansive dispossession and destruction of the vital values for their social reproduction: water and land. 
In the Andes, militarism under shared imperialism is the method used to expand, take over, or guarantee the operation of the mining circuit for finance capital reproduction. In the long-term existence of the modern world-system and the imperialist world-economy, the massacres of the indigenous peasantry and its proletarianized cholo sons and grandsons in Los Andes, operated as a constant under colonial mining and imperialist mining.

Colonial mining in Los Andes was the foundational method of the expanded original accumulation of the sixteenth century (Marx 1867, 874-875, 915). Correspondent to the material expansion of the European oligarchic financial bourgeoisies (Arrighi 1994) which emerged from the concentration of mercantile capital in the Middle East during the thirteen century (Abu-Lughod 1991) shaping the formation of the modern world-system. Imperialist mining is a vital process of production and hoarding developed by militarism, vital for the expanded capital reproduction of competing monopolistic finance capitals at a world-scale. Operating by the instrumentation of multinational corporations and capitalist state trusts under concrete differentiated levels of centralization and concentration. 

In their effort to conceptualize the antisystemic effects of the movements produced by the systemic structural process of the world-economy, Arrighi et al. (1989, 88) treated the antisystemic effects as caused by the centralization of capital as a world-scale tendency highly developed under the imperialist world-economy, and highlighted the divergence of the potentially serious [new] social locations of the antisystemic movements. Nevertheless, the causal mechanisms which connected the systemic structural processes of the imperialist world-economy with the consistent constitution of antisystemic identities in absolute negation with the expansive necessity of the metabolism of capital reproduction at a world-scale, weren't yet evidenced. As the events presented, the emergence of new challengers with distinguished antagonistic identities appears as reminders of the development of history. They are treated as traces or rather clues to look for a research question operative enough for a causal mechanism theory-building hypothesis: How do the antimining struggles have antisystemic effects over the capital reproduction of imperialist bourgeoisies?

I argue, that the effects of historic antisystemic challengers formed by the expansive structural processes, vital for the reproduction of competing financial capitals under a shared imperialist world-economy, are real in their consequences. Antimining struggles have world-scale effects over the diminishment of the rate of profit by: the obstruction of the circulation time in the transformation of surplus value into profit, over the state capitalist's trusts monetary-gold hoarding and trade, as well as disturbing the  advanced capital expected organic composition of the imperialist bourgeoisies investing in the mining reproduction circuit of accumulation. The effects of antimining struggles on the metabolic mechanisms of capital reproduction are antisystemic also because its absolute antagonist identity exacerbates the imperialistic competence for material expansion facing a forthcoming repartition world-war.

\section{Antisystemic resistance of historical challengers: the antimining movement of the indigenous-cholo Andean peasantry}
Imperialist mining is a central productive and hoarding process for the widespread reproduction of competing finance capital by its "nationalization" in semi-colonial capitalist states.

The U.S. extractive bourgeoisie has laid the institutional and military bases of imperialist domination in Peru since the beginning of the 20th century. The neoliberal advance of "globalization" processes during the XXth century’s last decades increased foreign direct investments in Peru, Los Andes, and Latin America more broadly not only from U.S. multinational companies but also from state mining corporations based in China, among others from Canada and Japan. 

China's imperialist mining bourgeoisie took gradual shared advantage of the institutional and military conditions established by the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie to operate in Peru. In twenty years, China built a considerable expansion in Peruvian copper mining but an incipient in gold mining.

Under these conditions of shared imperialism as a political regime of militarized accumulation, terrorist state violence is employed indiscreetly to guarantee the maximum rate of profit for the international mining bourgeoisie, expressing the development of the finance capitalist's state trusts contention at a world-economy scale.

\subsection{The historical resistance of indigenous-cholo peasant struggles against colonial and imperialist mining in Los Andes}

Around ten million "indigenous" survived the planned genocide in "America", being sublimated as inferior beings and reduced to a merely productive force by the colonization method of original accumulation and the consequent formation of the racialized world-class structure of the modern world-system. The world didn't fit anymore in the consciousness of the survivors. But in their collective consciousness survived a myth. Or a myth still makes sense in their consciousness, it is the myth of the new indigenous, of the Yawar-Inti (Blood Sun), and the resurgence of the indigenous world by a revolutionary vendetta. 

In opposition to Arboleda’s (2020) interpretation about the formation of indigenous “identity politics”, I argue that indigenous revolutionary subjectivity is an historical formation in movement, developing as an antagonist peasant class in formal subsumption under capitalism since the XVI century. 

Martín Arboleda states:
“Already in the 1990s, before so-called “identity politics” gained prominence in international academic circles, Ecuadorian philosopher Bolívar Echeverria —a renowned theoretician of cultural syncretism and capitalist modernity in Latin America— was already puzzled by the self-defeating cultural essentialisms of emerging variants of Latin American indigenous politics. Pre-Hispanic cultures in the Americas, he argued, were undergirded by profoundly relational cosmologies and hence were unable to perceive the “Other” as independent alterity. The otherness they perceived in the Spanish colonizers was for them a mere variant of the sameness of their own collective self. The European mindset, on the other hand, always construed the cultural other in terms of radical alterity, as absolute negation of their own identity” (Arboleda 2020:210). 

For Arboleda (2020) as for Bolívar Echevarria, the indigenous people couldn't understand the antagonism between them and the Spaniards. Their cosmology, they believe, didn't allow the indigenous to realize that they were being killed by a collective external and antagonist to their life or “collective self”. We need definitely to understand that Bolívar Echevarria should have ideologically omitted the work of the Peruvian anthropologist Luis E. Valcárcel, not to force an approximation to the work of José Carlos Mariátegui who found an already in movement indigenous revolutionary subject when they were going to work in their politicization, at the beginnings of the twentieth century. Fortunately, the work of Alberto Flores Galindo (2010), made justice to this issue tracing the myth of Yawar-Inti in emblematic indigenous and popular struggles of Peru’s history.

As the new indigenous and cholo intellectuals create the prophets of this myth, indigenous socialism forged at the beginnings of the XX century as the convergence of the "cholo group" with the indigenous peasantry already organizing themselves for indigenous revolution. The work of Mariátegui, Mayer and Valcárcel in the organization and creation of indigenous socialism, found an indigenous reemergence myth already in operation. The revolution realizes as a vendetta for the new indigenous, their remnants, their sons and grandsons. Revolution as a movement was already in operation in the Andes when the Amautas headed by José Carlos Mariátegui initiate their work.  

As he wrote in the prologue of “Tempestad en los Andes” de Valcárcel (Valcárcel 1927):
“I remember the unexpected and impressive type of agitator that I found four years ago in the Puno Indian Ezequiel Urviola. This encounter was the biggest surprise that Peru reserved for me upon my return from Europe. Urviola represented the first spark of a fire to come. He was the revolutionary Indian, the socialist Indian. Tuberculous, hunchbacked, he succumbed after two years of tireless work. Today it doesn't matter that Urviola doesn't exist. It's enough that he existed. As Valcárcel says, today the mountains are pregnant with Spartacs” (Mariátegui in the prologue to Valcárcel 1927:11).

As I will argue later, the history of indigenous class struggle definitely precedes socialism, but most importantly the indigenous peasantry has learned how to instrumentalize it. Further, at the first quart of the 21st century, the indigenous peasantry not only instrumentalizes socialism but also environmentalism (Mejía 2021) fixed with the conjuring of sentient entities as mountains, water and soil (de la Cadena 2020). The "cholo group" is a social stratum which formation that emerges from the mass of the indigenous peasantry servile or semi-servile, differentiated by the incorporation of elements from the Western-criollo culture. Yet, at the same time holding, preserving or recognizing their difference and their origins in the indigenous culture and in the indigenous peasantry social structure, as the mass from which they detached by migration (Quijano 1980:63-65).

As de la Cadena (2005:18) emphasizes about the visionary work of José María Arguedas: “[u]ltimately, Todas las Sangres proposed an alternative indigenous social movement, a critical ally of the modern left— yet with an a-modern hybrid logic of its own. Literacy and modern politics were important, yet they had to be selectively used and translated, rather than eradicating indigenous ways”. 

The hybridity in this sense is performative and not a reproduction of Western modernization as acculturation, instead the cholos as indigenous descendants have been building a proper cultural logic that recognizes their indigenous origins and also appropriates modern western elements, as they do with environmental discourses in the anti-mining and mining struggles. As the case of the anti-mining struggles of Cajamarca illustrates, the cholo and indigenous peasantry actualized their interpretation of mining from a class perspective fed by ecological discourses (Mejía 2021) and indigenous cosmopolitics (de la Cadena 2020) in the defense of water, land, and life.

Since the beginning of the 20th century, the mining industry in the Andes was under the almost exclusive control of the imperialist U.S. bourgeoise. Mining was one of the industries where capitalism developed more rapidly, especially in the Andes, where since 1895 monopolistic capital was directed toward large-scale mining, oil production and agriculture. The mining bourgeoisie is a hegemonic fraction of the imperialist rule coalition in Peru (Mariátegui 1928:21; Quijano 1988:116-21), and one of the central nodes of the imperialist bourgeoisies's circuit of accumulation. Indeed, the mining struggles carried out by miners’ unions were, since their genesis until the final 80's, active principles of anti-systemic resistance in Peru.

The processes of union formation and politicization of the mining proletariat as a vanguard in the central highlands of Peru went through a trayectory of radicalization during most of the XX century.\footnote{This radicalization trayectory developed by spreading into the medium and small mines nationally, also to the southern highland mines opened to the "nationalization" of the imperialist mining bourgeoisie by the location of its finance capital as foreign direct investment using the Cuajone contract secretly signed by the authoritarian bureachratic military "nationalist" government under the signature of Velasco Alvarado as is evidenced by the massacre of 1957 and 1966 in Toquepala (Moquegua). But during the 80's the cooptation of the mining workers unions of the Souther Copper Peru Mining Corporation consolidated within an institutionalization trayectory.} The intensity and harshness of militarism applied against mining workers protests in the Peruvian central highlands exploited by the Cerro de Pasco Copper Corporation (CPC), evidenced the severity of the disruption executed by mining struggles as a direct challenge to the accumulation circuit of U.S. state capitalist trusts finance capital. Appliying systematically its imperialist policy over the copper mines of the center highlands of Peru, since 1903, in the massacres of Malpaso (1930), Cobriza (1971) and, the militarized repression to the mining strikes campaign of the middle 80's repressed by the emprisionment of hundreds of unionized mining workers and the assassination of Saúl Cantoral in 1988 by the paramilitary aniquiliation task force "Comando Rodrigo Franco" operating under Alan García first government.

Neverthless, the radicalization of mining workers’ protests developed facing militarized repression. The formation of a vanguard of the Peruvian proletariat in open confrontation with the imperialist U.S. mining bourgeoisie was advancing until a point in which the PCP-SL and the MRTA initiated armed struggles. 

The politization trayectory of radicalization of the mining workers struggles became an anti-imperialist challenge in a context characterized by the escalation of armed struggle in South America and Latin America more broadly, and mainly by the resolution of the imperialist contention between the U.S.S.R. and the U.S. triggered by the consequences of the sino-soviet seccession. Developing in the formation of the bases for the sino-american finance capitals centralization gradually after the shared imperialist resolution of the Vietnam war, until the initial years of the XXI century marked by the September 11th attacks to Wallstreet, the Pentagon and the White House. 

When, under conditions of shared imperialism, these finance capitals appeared to stenght a process of descentralization opposed to the operation of its finance capitals across the borders of China and U.S. "nationalization" as industrial capital sharing in that manner the accumulation conditions for its consensed competition. The descentralization of the sino-american finance capitals have differentiated effects for the circuit of accumulation of each imperialist bourgeoisies depending on its particular current levels of concentration and centralization. 

Also, the world-scale effects of the advanced decentralization of the sino-american finance capitals exhibit differentiated consequences over the processes of production and circulation, shaping its transitional formation into the next international division of labor; hegemonic imperialist state; identities, tactics and strategies of class struggle; and future but soon present geo-economical territoriality of the capitalist world-economy configured by the results of the multilevel polity contention of imperialist competition involving imperialist wars (Ukraine, Palestine, and soon Taiwan) and imperialist militarism interventions as are developing in Latin America. 

Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru, Chile, Venezuela, Argentina, and Brazil political regimes where destabilized by several attempts to stop the development of the populist and left electoral tide, by the typical preparation of coups d'etat transparently certified by the official U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie's bureacuracy official located in each of those countries minus Venezuela: the U.S. Embassors.

\section{Anti-mining and mining struggles in the Andes as an antisystemic movement}

Antimining struggles
have world-scale effects over the diminishment of the rate of profit by the obstruction
of the circulation time in the transformation of surplus value into profit, over the
state capitalists trusts monetary-gold hoarding and trade, as well as disturbing the
advanced capital expected organic composition of the imperialist bourgeoisies investing
in the mining reproduction circuit of accumulation.

Anti-mining struggles have an anti-systemic effect on the imperialist bourgeoisies circuit of extended capital accumulation. By blocking the expansion of the mining extractive frontier and obstructing the production of mining commodities, anti-mining struggles are challenging the circulation of the productive capital of the imperialist mining bourgeoisies. Likewise, by obstructing the production and circulation of mining commodities, the capital accumulation circuit of the imperialist bourgeoisies can't accomplish the conversion of their productive capital into augmented money-capital. If the mineral commodities aren’t sold in the international market, the finance capital invested in mining extraction can't return in profits. 
Since the early 20th century, mining investments in the Andes and Latin America were basically monopolized by the U.S. international mining bourgeoisie.  Gradually, in the 21st century, China’s mining operations increased in Latin America since the imperialist domination couldn't exclude Chinese corporations from the mining industry in countries where U.S. imperialism rules. The exception to China’s mining transnational expansion in the Andes is the gold mining sector; with relevant implications for the dynamics of transition, hegemonic crisis, and regime of accumulation in the current critical juncture of global capitalism.

\subsection{The antisystemic effects hypothesis for anti-mining struggles}

The location of this antisystemic historical resistance in Los Andes is indigenous in its broad base, structurally placed in subordination by the negative dialectics of race, which created the international division of labor by the material expansion of the competitive semi-colonial policy for mining exploitation, trade, and hoarding of mercantile capitals in its attempted transition toward the formation of the oligarchic financial bourgeoisies which held the modern world-system under four successive Western inner-transitions since the XVI century.

The mining dependence of the capitalist industries which effectively offers a rate of profit of the magnitude of interest for the competing imperialist bourgeoisies, such as the war industry, space industry, and computational and high-technology industries.
Also suggest an analysis of the world-scale effects of antimining struggles because of its consequences on the circulation time, and capital organic composition in the transformation of surplus value into profit. Determined by the natural, cultural, and —as the antisystemic resistance of indigenous and cholo Andean peasantry evidence—: historical conditions, in which the vital processes of production and circulation of capital as a whole have to operate, materially.

As a whole, the reproduction of certain capital involves the transformation of money-capital in productive-capital for an expected rate of profit equal to the ratio between the surplus-value already congealed in surplus-product (including exportations) -as the value form of a certain volume of commodity-capital produced by the exploitation of advanced unpaid concrete labor-, ready for market consumption at a fixed price; and the total capital advanced (Marx 1864-1865[2017], 49-55; Bukharin 1916 [1966], 81-82).

Antimining struggles in Los Andes antagonize these reproduction processes and mechanisms vital for the modern world-system, and the imperialist world-economy. If Andean anti-mining struggles decreases the imperialist mining bourgeoisies's rate of profit, it's antisystemic effects should have differentiated consequences on the multilevel polity contention among the imperialist bourgeoisies ruling the U.S. and the imperialist bourgeoisie ruling China for the expansion of its circuit of capital accumulation. At the current breakdown of the modern world-system shared imperialism of Sino-American finance capital, centralized during the '70s with differentiated accumulation regimes ruling their capital concentration until the 2000s when began its decentralization process.

The differentiated reproduction outcomes obtained by concrete finance capitalists from the rate of profit depend on the natural and cultural production conditions expressed in the organic and technical compositions of capital at each instance of the whole circuit of capital reproduction. The differentiation mechanism operating at the level of the rate of profit depends on the transformation of surplus-value into profit at a concrete time of circulation and expected proportions of variable and constant capital consumption given by the natural, cultural, and -as I argue here- by the historical conditions manifested in the Andean indigenous-cholo antimining struggles as historical challengers formed with the constitution of the modern world-system and the reproduction processes of the capitalist world-economy. And also, by the precedent repartition of that super-profit exploited in its components: interest, profit, and rent.

The antimining peasants’ struggles in the Andes of South America effectively obstruct the conversion of the money invested as mining productive capital by different imperialist bourgeoisies in competition for the extension of its reproduction circuit scale. Employing its militarized policy over the territories cursed by the abundance of mineral commodities under different forms of militarism, as military and paramilitary interventions in Latin America, or as new imperialist wars as initially expressed in Ukraine and Palestine (or sooner Taiwan) ongoing multilevel polity conflicts.

The processes of production and circulation of mining imperialist productive capital had been challenged by proletarian mining workers' struggles in China at the coal and lead mines of Anyuan, Pinghsiang County (Kiangsi Province) and Shuikoushan, Changning (Hunan Province) between 1922 and 1927; as well as in Peru in episodes of mining contention identified as the massacres of Malpaso (1930), Toquepala (1966), and Cobriza (1971). Nevertheless, the cooperation between the peasants' movement and the proletarian mining workers in China developed in the betrayed democratic revolution of 1927, and the further national resistance against Japanese and U.S. imperialism. 

In contrast, the extension of the peasants-workers revolutionary coalition is a matter of polemic between historians of the peasants' movement and mining worker's struggles in Peru. The development of the peasantry as a class for itself sparked at the final decades of the XX century, the indigenous rebellion in Ecuador of 1991 and the Chiapas liberation by the EZLN in 1994, which preceded the resistance against the expansion of the mining extractive frontier accelerated since the first years of the XXI century.

The antimining struggles of the Andean indigenous peasantry are historically grounded in the problem of land. The dispossession and destruction of vital values for the social reproduction of the peasantry and the rural proletariat as the soil and water, by the expansion of the mining extractive frontier is unreconcilable with the existence not only of the peasantry but for the reproduction of the rural proletariat surrounding the imperialist mining enclave. 

The territories cursed by the mining industry are objects of total biodiversity extermination due to the destruction of the conditions for life in general, and not only the cultural or natural conditions for peasant economies. 

The expansion of the imperialist policy over values as the natural sources for commodities production, transportation infrastructure, and gold hoarded, rather than sole money-capital is in dispute by imperialist military interventions and imperialist wars, by which certain monopolistic finance capital destroy the productive capital of the rival imperialist bourgeoisie, expanding in that manner its circuit of reproduction and restructuring the relations of production of the world economy and, therefore, the world-class structure from which that victorious imperialist bourgeoisie pursues alienation by its systemic-metabolic processes of capital production and circulation. Given the advanced development of its compulsive, and currently contradictory mechanisms of concentration and centralization of capital.

Although past mining contention waves of antisystemic resistance occurred during transitional stages of capitalism modern world-system development -i.e. as the mining proletariat struggles developed in Peru and Great Britain during the first quarter of the 1900’s, or in China during the first years of the second-, the current restructuration attempt of the modern capitalist world-economy not only depend on a completed transition in the afterward of U.S. hegemony breakdown. 

Due to the advanced symptoms of the overaccumulation crisis and its attempted resolution, first through the liberalization of the gold price out of the financial institutions of Bretton Woods in 1971 (Fig. 1), and then through the extension of the mining extractive frontier particularly of gold production motivated by the demand of monetary gold holdings for national reserve’s banks exponentially since 2001; the tendency to accumulate monetary gold in national reserves that was strongly monopolistic under U.S. financial capital until the beginning of the new millennia began to be followed not only by the European central banks but also by Russia, India, and specifically China. 

The last mentioned state capitalist trust increased its acquisition of gold for its national reserves, as its superiority in monetary holdings compared to the U.S. (Fig. 2) required a balance in proportion to its monetary-gold holdings (Fig.3) to overcome the U.S. dollar as hegemonic currency, and intensified its capital production by gold mining in national contexts under which the situation of sino-american shared imperialism remains, as in Latin America.

The total reserves of China in 2021 (3,43 trillion US dollars) are 4.79 times the volume of total reserves of U.S. for the same year (716,15 billion US dollars) (Fig.1). Although, the U.S. total gold reserves for the same last year 2021 was of 475,95 billion, and China’s total gold reserves only ascend to 114,01 billion (0,114 trillion) (Fig.2).

A long twentieth century of imperialism over gold mining countries apparently holds a current U.S. high advantage in monetary gold holdings, which implies a non-actually completed transition to China as a new hegemonic state of global capitalism. Antimining and mining struggles against U.S. gold mining and China copper mining in Peru evidenced a complex dynamic of imperialist mining from which approaches of U.S. hegemonic crisis and the initiation of a fifth systemic cycle of accumulation with “Chinese characteristics” can be problematized beyond.