<iframe style="border-radius:12px" src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/0zXMZx9kvFO6x58JiIh4BJ?utm_source=generator" width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" loading="lazy"></iframe>


The interactional sociology of Erving Goffman developed by the historical political sociologist Charles Tilly sediment an ultimate theoretical framework for the study of historical transitions by disruption of the systems of existent repertories of struggle.

During the current breakdown of the international state system, the crisis in Gaza and the genocide of Palestina has been converted into the "transnational" field of contention in different contexts.

While the interpretations and performances nurturing the "experience" of struggle flourished instantly in the US, mainly organized by Social Justice for Palestine (SJP) and its national system linked to People for Socialist Liberation (PSL), developed a well measured, funded and equipped national campaign of detainments triggered by a well developed performance of "antagonization of police" to reach "radicalization" and "escalation", but clearly, without "direct action". Collective actions, finally, directed to a great defeat which by the puritanism sacrificed political commitments which supposed to clean the faces of ethical individuals mobilized mainly by its "transnational" link to a class struggle in which their performances develop in dislocation from the real power dynamic over which the Palestinian struggle of the US college students have null effects.

The attribution of effectivity to the performances of encampments which finished with a well coopted labor union completely integrated in the political system. The "experience" created for the college US students nationally promote a "global" image of complete defeat of the Palestinian struggle in the current moment of the Gaza crisis, shows a particular face to the historical resistance of the people of not only Palestine, but for elsewhere around the world. The role of social media, mainly platforms as Instagram and Signal, facilite an infrastructure for "shared lived solidarity" with the lives and deaths of Palestinian children's that apparently created the most great movement of humanist solidarity in whole history. It was born in America, and is blessed by the bites of the bad Zionist in power which not represent the ideals of democracy. In that manner our individualistic souls can be sacrificed "virtually" by being martyrized, impresionad, treated as the "pigs" treat "Palestinians".

What the college students saw as the most powerful student movement since the Vietnam anti-war movement, is really working to produce a global "experience" of defeat of the social forces in struggle against genocide and militarized repression beyond Gaza. The ideological capacity to make the social struggle in the US to develop dislocated from the real outcomes of the political situation which is in question in the Gaza crisis triggered and defended by US imperialism in support of Israel state building genocide.

The absence of self-bombing performances or armed struggle as well as hostages situations, performances of struggle developed robustly in the field of contention configured in Gaza against US imperialism, is not a casual result of the perfect form which the oppression of every challenger to the establishment reached by capitalism development.  


of a culture of democratic tolerance of class domination completely transparent in US as a social formation in real subsumption under the control of a certain fraction of industrial and financial capital alignments which rule at the top of the its "state", in coordination with their parts in the international state system hegemonically organized by the Sino-American capital shared imperialism of the Post-Cold War.  


This is a view that focuses on three key dimensions: first, the ongoing forging of new collective identities (‘identity shift’ and ‘actor constitution’ in the authors' terminology of mechanisms); second, new definitions of action (‘polarization’ and ‘scale shift’); and third, definitions and redefinitions of opportunity and threat (the mechanism of ‘opportunity—threat spirals’). Simplified, cultural elements of the _Dynamics of Contention_ can be thought of as anchored in the ongoing definition and redefinition of (1) the subject, (2) its actions and (3) the target or object of its actions.

