Sauve qui peut de vivre (la vie) pour soi:: Every man for himself:: A man for himself:: Sauve qui peut (La vie):: A man without a woman is a man without fortune nor vérté. Neither value, except for himself:: A value is not value until is exchanged, a value which is not in exchange is because lacks useful properties, or because its properties are non useful for the purpose of exchange oriented by a compulsive necessity, socially and individually out of circulation. Become inorganic, out of the acknowledge metabolism, out of philosophy, out of its ideal form of value, out of circulation, when it disappear like a ghost at the light of a different metabolism. Matter, existent, but without existing within the composition of an acknowledge metabolism. Inorganic nature, nature in liberty, out of necessity:: Sauve la vie.
Appearing in its imagination, as an inorganic nature, which becomes or a necessity for some metabolism, or by the consciousness of the materiality of intelectual (spiritual) experience, a living nature non-acknowledged non-appropriated non-compared non-exchanged non-measured non-priced non-valorized non-capital. Liberty of nature, the most impressive form of appearance of anything before its production as value, so, before the idea of value, apriori the abstraction of the self living nature as a sole organism congealed in the false equivalence of nature with life. 
The superstition of the body, is the superstition of the soul, as an essential substance independent and causally prima inter pares. So nature is measured in an individualized standard of living (life or death became a contradiction within nature), which runs parallel, and definitely possible to be or become related to, its standard of value in the circulation process of capital. The historical contradiction demand us to destroy the reproductive capacity of capital, as value-form which creation and reproduction (first in theory, and then in reality) operate materially and consciously experienced or not, as inorganic alienated nature. 
Which is a different transformation of nature, as inorganic nature separated from the organic (supra)metabolism left outside from the ontological and productive compulsion of humans idealism. That nature, at least, what abstraction (Plato), reason (Kant), logic (Hegelian), and rationalism (Descartes) left out there as the unacknowledged and non-instrumented organic metabolism appearing as "living existence", and also as the realness of fear to the inorganic immanence of death, or of being killed by nature, as nature. 
Nature in *any* standard of value measure can hold comparison, if not as living nature. Being compared by any standard, depreciate its value before and during its use in the production of *some*thing, for an organic or inorganic composition. The separation between nature and humans is mediated by appropriation, production, so by capital formation. As it appears always, conscious or not, in its first form of value, as non-alienated nature. In its elementary, physical form as use-value, as *some*thing with vérté, became organic nature within the composition, formation of capital.