There was a tortuous and painful end to COP29, the international climate change conference held in oil-rich Baku, Azerbaijan. The main issue was how much would the rich countries hand over to the poor countries to pay for the measures to mitigate global warming and handle the damage caused by rising ‘greenhouse gas’ emissions. The finance target set was for more than $1.3trn a year by 2035. But the final deal was based on just $300bn in actual grants and low-interest loans from the developed world. The rest would have to come from private investors and perhaps levies on fossil fuels and frequent flyers – the details of which remained vague.

Weitzman argued that averages do not tell the full story. [Indeed, a Pareto probability distribution function of the current projections has ‘fat tails’](https://thenextrecession.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=10ca28c85f954d133d05b795d6e672af421c8586457bd9103bf7db7feec32e3d&blog_id=11256874&post_id=29707&user_id=0&subs_id=271926580&signature=af782cdef5888c3d2aff0d8e7f0e5474&email_name=new-post&user_email=jmmejiafl@flacso.edu.ec&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly90aGVuZXh0cmVjZXNzaW9uLndvcmRwcmVzcy5jb20vMjAyMC8wMi8xMS90aGUtY2xpbWF0ZS1hbmQtdGhlLWZhdC10YWlsLXJpc2sv) that suggest there is a 1% likelihood of a 12⁰C increase in temperature. Weitzman: _“the most striking feature of the economics of climate change is that its extreme downside is non-negligible. Deep structural uncertainty about the unknown unknowns of what might go very wrong is coupled with essentially unlimited downside liability on possible planetary damages.”_ With that kind of temperature increase, human life would probably not survive. The problem is tha_t “nobody lives in ‘global-average-land’!”_ [The storm following a drought that dumps a season of rainfall in a day likely has implications for financial risk, but is not captured in metrics of average annual precipitation in a region](https://thenextrecession.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=61dc6fa8a84213523bc410732bf6786beaf9a6592a4f5f5c1e40187adde6b151&blog_id=11256874&post_id=29707&user_id=0&subs_id=271926580&signature=f24818812e29d0f6a00c18cd221a238e&email_name=new-post&user_email=jmmejiafl@flacso.edu.ec&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tZXRhbW9kZWwuYmxvZy9wb3N0cy9mZWQtY2xpbWF0ZS1yaXNrLw=). Economic models ignore these subtleties in climate. The model used by many of the world’s central banks, for example, relies on a damage function that relates regional economic and labour productivity to annual temperature and precipitation.