---
created: 2024-08-06T15:43:56 (UTC -07:00)
tags: []
source: https://www.elibrary.imf.org/display/book/9781451981742/ch003.xml
author: International Monetary Fund
---

# Gold in: SDRs, Currencies, & Gold

> ## Excerpt
> Abstract The Second Amendment of the Articles has abolished the former official price of gold and all the former obligations of members and the Fund to pay or to receive gold in normal operations and transactions under the Articles. Nevertheless, that price can still produce certain consequences under the Articles. For example, if the Fund sells gold at a price above the former official price, the proceeds equivalent to the official price and the balance of the proceeds are posted to different accounts.233 Furthermore, the Fund has an obligation to complete the distribution of a portion of its gold to countries that were members of the Fund on August 31, 1975 and to sell a further portion for the benefit of developing countries that were members on that date.234 In addition, the former official price would be a factor in the distribution of the Fund’s holdings of gold in a liquidation of the Fund.235

---
## Obligations Involving Gold

The Second Amendment of the Articles has abolished the former official price of gold and all the former obligations of members and the Fund to pay or to receive gold in normal operations and transactions under the Articles. Nevertheless, that price can still produce certain consequences under the Articles. For example, if the Fund sells gold at a price above the former official price, the proceeds equivalent to the official price and the balance of the proceeds are posted to different accounts.<sup><a id="Rch03fn233" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn233">233</a></sup> Furthermore, the Fund has an obligation to complete the distribution of a portion of its gold to countries that were members of the Fund on August 31, 1975 and to sell a further portion for the benefit of developing countries that were members on that date.<sup><a id="Rch03fn234" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn234">234</a></sup> In addition, the former official price would be a factor in the distribution of the Fund’s holdings of gold in a liquidation of the Fund.<sup><a id="Rch03fn235" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn235">235</a></sup>

The obligations of the Fund referred to above do not exhaust the obligations of the Fund with respect to gold. For example, the Fund, in all its policies and decisions relating to gold, must be guided by the objectives of promoting better international surveillance of international liquidity, making the SDR the principal reserve asset in the international monetary system, and avoiding the management of the price, or the establishment of a fixed price, in the gold market.<sup><a id="Rch03fn236" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn236">236</a></sup> Similarly, under a provision that resulted from efforts to formulate an obligation of members with respect to gold it was agreed finally that the obligation should be implicit in the following text:

> Each member undertakes to collaborate with the Fund and with other members in order to ensure that the policies of the member with respect to reserve assets shall be consistent with the objectives of promoting better international surveillance of international liquidity and making the special drawing right the principal reserve asset in the international monetary system.<sup><a id="Rch03fn237" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn237">237</a></sup>

Members may be subject to obligations with respect to gold under other international arrangements, provided that these obligations are consistent with the Articles, and in particular the provision quoted above. Obligations with respect to gold of participants in the EMS have been discussed already (see pp. 56-57), and further information on this subject can be found later in the section on Use (see p. 95).

The European Court of Justice has considered the question whether the Treaty of Rome permits a member country of the European Community to restrict the importation of gold coins, such as krugerrands, that are produced outside the European Community but circulate freely in another member country. The question was considered in relation to the provisions of the Treaty of Rome that prohibit any measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction on imports from other members of the Community. The Court concluded, in a judgment of November 23, 1978, that means of payment were not within these provisions, and that, although there might be some doubt whether krugerrands were to be considered means of legal payment, krugerrands were treated as equivalent to currency on the money markets of members of the Community that permit dealings in them and therefore would be regarded in that way by the Court.<sup><a id="Rch03fn238" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn238">238</a></sup>

In reaching this conclusion the Court held that the krugerrands were not goods and not subject to the prohibition of restrictions on imports of goods as between members of the Community. The English Court of Appeal held, in the light of this decision, that three men prosecuted under a provision of the Customs and Excise Act, 1952 were properly convicted for attempted smuggling of the krugerrands into England, because they could not rely on the argument that the provision was inconsistent with the Treaty of Rome. The question then arose whether the krugerrands were subject to forfeiture as “goods” under another provision of the statute. The Court of Appeal held that they were goods for the purposes of this provision. The fact that gold was subject to the Exchange Control Act, 1947 did not mean that the Treasury had exclusive authority over gold and that the customs authorities could not apply the provision on forfeiture under the 1952 statute.<sup><a id="Rch03fn239" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn239">239</a></sup>

## Valuation

A variety of practices on the valuation of gold are being followed by the Fund and its members.

### Fund’s Statistics

The presentation of gold in international reserve statistics in the Fund’s monthly publication, _International Financial Statistics_, has been modified, beginning with the August 1979 issue, as a result of discussions by the Executive Board. The former tables on SDRs, Reserve Positions in the Fund, and Foreign Exchange are retained but the sum of them is reported as a new table on Total Reserves minus Gold. The table on Total Reserves, which includes gold at the former official price of SDR 35 per ounce, is retained, but a new table on Gold expressed in millions of ounces replaces the former table on Gold valued at SDR 35 per ounce. The table on physical quantities is supplemented by foot-tables to the main table showing gold holdings (for All Countries, the IMF, the EMCF, and the World) valued at SDR 35 per ounce and at market prices, the London market price in U.S. dollars, the U.S. dollar/SDR rate, and the derived market price for gold in SDRs. The London market price for gold is also given as a separate line on the country page for the United Kingdom. The Total Reserves table is supplemented by foot-tables on All Countries’ Total Reserves with Gold valued at SDR 35 per ounce and at market prices.

The country pages now include two new standard series on each member’s total reserves minus gold as well as its official gold holdings in physical terms. In addition, a line appears for the U.S. dollar value of gold in accordance with national valuation practices.<sup><a id="Rch03fn240" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn240">240</a></sup>

The techniques available for the valuation of the Fund’s gold for its operational and other purposes were described in broad terms in Pamphlet No. 26.<sup><a id="Rch03fn241" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn241">241</a></sup> The Fund has decided that for the time being it would not change the valuation of its gold as shown in its accounts.

### International Organizations

The Agreement of March 13, 1979 among the central banks of the European Community on the operating procedures for the EMS provides for the mode of valuation of the gold that participants in the exchange rate and intervention arrangements must contribute to the EMCF. The formula refers to the average of the prices, converted into ECUs, recorded daily at the two London fixings during the previous six calendar months, but not exceeding the average price of the two fixings on the penultimate working day of the period.<sup><a id="Rch03fn242" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn242">242</a></sup>

Under Article 4 of the Statutes of the BIS, the franc that is the unit of account of the BIS is equivalent to 0.290 322 58 gram of fine gold. Since 1973, assets and liabilities in U.S. dollars in the balance sheet were translated on the basis of 1 franc = US$0.3941, which resulted from the last par value of the U.S. dollar (US$42.22 per fine ounce of gold). A BIS communiqué of June 11, 1979 announced that this price had become increasingly unrealistic when compared with market prices. In consequence, the Bank’s currency assets and liabilities, which constituted the major part of its balance sheet, had come to be heavily overstated in absolute terms and in relation to its capital and reserves. To eliminate these distortions, the Bank had decided that, with effect from the June 1979 Statement of Account, the new basis for translation would be the average market price of gold during the Bank’s financial year 1978/79, that is, US$208 per fine ounce. The Bank would apply this datum for an indefinite period. For ease of comparison, figures would be given on the new and on the old bases until March 1980, after which they would be presented on the new basis only. The change was confined to presentation and would not affect substantive rights and obligations.

Under this decision, the valuation of gold will not change automatically with changes in the market price of gold as it does under certain international or national arrangements. The change in valuation of the existing unit of account could be made without amendment of the Statutes of the BIS, but the adoption of a new unit of account might have required amendment.

### National Practices

Practices of certain national monetary authorities on the valuation of gold have been discussed in Pamphlets No. 22<sup><a id="Rch03fn243" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn243">243</a></sup> and No. 26<sup><a id="Rch03fn244" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn244">244</a></sup>. On February 8,1979, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, in a parliamentary written answer, announced that the Second Amendment had made it appropriate to review the practice of valuing gold at the old official price. As a result of the review, the gold holdings of the United Kingdom would no longer be valued at US$42.22 per ounce. In future, on each March 31, beginning on that date in 1979, gold would be valued on the basis of the average daily price in the London market over the preceding three months, with a discount of 25 per cent. March 31 is the end of the accounting year of the Exchange Equalization Account, the government account managed by the Bank of England in which monetary reserves of the United Kingdom are held. The purpose of the discount was to give some flexibility in selling or pledging gold without showing a loss as compared with the price at which gold was valued as a result of the calculation made at the previous March 31. SDRs and currencies, other than the U.S. dollar, would be valued at average exchange rates recorded by the Bank of England over the three months preceding the end of March. All valuations would be shown in U.S. dollars.<sup><a id="Rch03fn245" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn245">245</a></sup> The Chancellor pointed out that most other countries valued their holdings of SDRs and currencies at market-related rates and that Italy, France, and the Netherlands followed this practice for their gold also.

As noted already, the President of the Swiss National Bank is reported to have announced that it would be necessary to revalue the Bank’s holdings of gold. A decision had not been taken on how the new presentation would be made, but the purpose would be to offset the effects on the balance sheet of changes in the exchange rate of the Swiss franc.<sup><a id="Rch03fn246" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn246">246</a></sup>

## Subsidies to Producers

Under Article IV, Section 2 of the Fund’s Articles before the Second Amendment, a member was prevented from purchasing gold at a premium from anyone, including domestic producers of gold. The Fund objected to certain enacted legal provisions or proposed provisions on the ground that they would authorize subsidies to producers that would constitute increases in the price of gold in contravention of Article IV, Section 2. The Fund did not object to subsidies that in its opinion did not involve an increase in price. The Fund developed policies under which payments could be made if they were related to the costs of production but did not take the form of uniform payments per ounce of gold. Much scholasticism was devoted to the task of formulating national legal provisions that avoided the pitfall of the objectionable subsidy.<sup><a id="Rch03fn247" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn247">247</a></sup> The results were often schemes of great complexity.

The abrogation of the former Article IV, Section 2 and the official price of gold enables members to pay the market price of gold to domestic producers. For example, Section 1 of Circular No. 602 of the Central Bank of the Philippines, dated April 17, 1978, provides that all the primary gold production of Philippine mines must be delivered to the Central Bank. Section 3 provides that:

> The purchase of gold by the Central Bank shall be made in Philippine currency at the guiding rate of exchange of the peso the U.S. Dollar (sic) based on the price per ounce of gold prevailing in the international market on the date of delivery to the Central Bank, or to the Central-Bank designated depository abroad, of gold in “good delivery bars” of international standard with a minimum fineness at 995, less corresponding charges.<sup><a id="Rch03fn248" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn248">248</a></sup>

The gold acquired under this provision is deemed to be part of the Philippines’ monetary reserves.

The Bank of the Republic of Colombia purchases gold produced within the country at the average price prevailing in the London and Zurich markets during the preceding week.<sup><a id="Rch03fn249" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn249">249</a></sup> South Africa has changed the practice by which the Reserve Bank advanced the official price to domestic producers and then sold the gold on their behalf, as a result of which further payments were made to them. The Reserve Bank now purchases gold from the producers under a formula based on prices in the market and provides for a small charge to cover costs, and the Bank sells the gold abroad on its own behalf.<sup><a id="Rch03fn250" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn250">250</a></sup>

## Judicial Application of Gold Value Clauses

The decision of October 25, 1976 of the Milan Court on appeal in _Balkan Bulgarian Airlines v. Tammaro_,<sup><a id="Rch03fn251" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn251">251</a></sup> illustrates the need for the prompt substitution of a satisfactory unit of account in those international conventions in which the unit is still gold. The case was decided on the basis of the Warsaw Convention of October 12, 1929 on transportation by air, as amended by the Hague Protocol of September 28, 1955, in which conventions it is now agreed that the SDR shall be substituted for the Poincaré franc, although nonmembers of the Fund may still rely on the franc.<sup><a id="Rch03fn252" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn252">252</a></sup> Bulgaria is a nonmember of the Fund. The case was decided before the Second Amendment became effective. The court made no reference to the Montreal Protocols of 1975, the proposed Second Amendment of the Articles, or the complexities of the changing role of gold.

At the end of a flight from Milan to Sofia on Balkan Bulgarian Airlines on August 14, 1971, an Italian passenger was unable to recover his two suitcases. Subsequently, one suitcase was returned to him from Tokyo. The passenger sued for the full value of the lost suitcase under provisions of Italian law, without reference to the limited liability of the carrier under the Warsaw Convention. The judge of first instance gave judgment for the plaintiff in accordance with his claim. The carrier appealed on October 22, 1974.

The Milan tribunal held that the case had to be decided exclusively according to the Montreal Convention. Under the convention, the carrier’s liability was limited to 250 Poincaré francs, which amounted to 14.7375 grams of fine gold. This amount, according to the convention, had to be translated into a national currency according to the gold value of the currency at the date of judgment. In order to make this calculation, the court referred to the quotation of gold in London and Zurich as the principal European gold markets and found that the average price at the date of judgment was 127.50 U.S. dollars per troy ounce. On this basis, 14.7375 grams were equal to US$60.41. The official exchange rate of the U.S. dollar at the same date was Lit 879.95. These data, together with the presumed weight of the suitcase (ten kilograms), led to an amount of lire in excess of the amount of the judgment of the court of first instance. The Milan court concluded, therefore, that the carrier had no interest on which to base an appeal, and dismissed the claim.<sup><a id="Rch03fn253" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn253">253</a></sup>

The judgment augments the small body of cases in which the market price of gold has been applied by the courts under a gold value clause.<sup><a id="Rch03fn254" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn254">254</a></sup> The court assumed that the market price at the date of the decision was a basis for calculating the gold value of the lira _(il valore oro della moneta alla data della decisione).<sup><a id="Rch03fn255" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn255">255</a></sup>_ A rational choice open to a court is to adopt the solution applied by some international organizations and by the Hamburg District Court,<sup><a id="Rch03fn256" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn256">256</a></sup> which is to hold that gold must be translated into the SDR and the value of a currency in terms of the SDR determined in accordance with the Fund’s method of valuation. A court would have to be prepared to dismiss certain possible objections to this solution. First, the solution depends on a relationship between a gold unit of account and the SDR on the basis of its original definition in terms of gold, even though the Second Amendment no longer contains a definition of the value of the SDR in terms of gold. The absence of this definition has been relied on, however, as further evidence that the SDR is the direct descendant of a gold unit of account, and that the accession by the SDR to the role of unit of account was completed when the Second Amendment became effective.<sup><a id="Rch03fn257" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn257">257</a></sup>

Another difficulty that a court might have to confront would be the argument that some national monetary authorities and the EMS are valuing gold in relation to market prices. This trend is not yet universal among monetary authorities, although it is growing, but a court might have to consider the particular implications of the valuation by its own monetary authorities of gold in their reserves by reference to the market price.<sup><a id="Rch03fn258" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn258">258</a></sup> It should not be difficult to dispose of any argument based on this action in the absence of any provision of law requiring courts to follow the practice of their national monetary authorities. Gold value clauses have been based on the function of gold as the common denominator for expressing the value of currencies. The market price does not have this function.

## Official Translation of Gold Value Clauses

Some countries have solved the problem of applying a gold value clause in certain conventions and statutes giving domestic effect to them by official regulations translating the value of gold into the SDR or into the domestic currency for the purpose of these conventions and domestic laws.<sup><a id="Rch03fn259" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn259">259</a></sup> A partial survey by one author in mid-1978 showed that this action had been taken by the United Kingdom, Norway, and Sweden, and that similar action was under consideration in other countries.<sup><a id="Rch03fn260" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn260">260</a></sup> This author raises the question whether a country can take action of this kind if the country did not incorporate authority to do so in the legislation giving effect to the convention, but he also doubts whether legislative authority of this kind would be consistent with the convention.

Luxembourg has adopted, in accordance with a project under consideration in Belgium, legislation that provides for the translation into Luxembourg francs of gold value clauses in all international conventions to which Luxembourg is a party. The formula for translation is to apply to a convention until the gold value clause in it is modified. The formula is 19.74824173 milligrams of gold of 900/1000 fineness per Luxembourg franc, which corresponds to the last par value of the currency declared to the Fund. The statute is a further example of the continuing effect of former par values for certain purposes. The formula, however, does not purport to be a par value for the currency.

The Carriage by Air and Road Act, 1979 of the United Kingdom<sup><a id="Rch03fn261" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn261">261</a></sup> is an example of a statute that substitutes the SDR for the Poincaré franc in English statutes that give domestic effect to the Warsaw Convention relating to carriage by air, as amended by subsequent conventions and protocols, the Convention on the Contract for the International Carriage of Goods by Road (CMR), and the Convention on the Contract for the International Carriage of Passengers and Luggage by Road (CVR). The new statute provides, in one context, that the sums mentioned in SDRs

> shall be deemed to refer to the special drawing right as defined by the International Monetary Fund. Conversion of the sums into national currencies shall, in case of judicial proceedings, be made according to the value of such currencies in terms of the special drawing right at the date of the judgment.<sup><a id="Rch03fn262" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn262">262</a></sup>

The value of the SDR on a particular day is to be treated as equal to such a sum in sterling as the Fund has fixed for that day, or in the absence of a determination for that day, for the last day before that day for which a sum has been fixed. A certificate given by or on behalf of the Treasury stating the value of the SDR in sterling is to be conclusive. The Treasury may charge a reasonable fee for a certificate.<sup><a id="Rch03fn263" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn263">263</a></sup>

## Amendment of Treaties

Resolution 6-78 of the Board of Governors of the African Development Bank of May 4, 1978 notes the Second Amendment of the Fund’s Articles and certain of the changes it has brought about in relation to gold.<sup><a id="Rch03fn264" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn264">264</a></sup> The preamble states that “there is an urgent need to adopt suitable measures to bring the Bank’s Agreement and valuation methods into line with the developments” that are noted. The Resolution would amend the Articles by deleting references to gold in various provisions in which gold is referred to in connection with the Bank’s activities.

Under Article 60 of the Bank’s charter, proposed amendments approved by the Board of Governors enter into force after acceptance by specified proportions of the membership. Action on the Resolution has been postponed. The reason for the postponement does not affect the conclusion that, in this and in other treaties, provisions relating to gold may have become outmoded. These provisions may deal with a number of topics other than gold value clauses. Payments in gold are an obvious example of one such topic. Amendment may not be urgent in some instances, if, for example, alternative modes of payment are possible.

## Use

Under the rules relating to the “snake,” the settlement of debts arising from intervention by participants in the “snake” was made in reserve assets according to the composition of the reserves of the debtor. Settlements were to be made, in principle, in SDRs, reserve positions in the Fund, currencies, and gold. In practice, gold was never used in settlements. Under the EMS, each participant in the exchange rate and intervention arrangements must contribute, and a nonparticipating EC member may contribute, 20 per cent of its holdings of gold and U.S. dollars to the EMCF in return for ECUs. This level of contribution is maintained by adjustments, at quarterly intervals, based on changes in the volume of a contributor’s reserves and changes in the price of gold and in exchange rates for the dollar. This use of gold is a new development.

To the extent that settlements of debts arising from intervention are made on the basis of the composition of the debtor’s reserves, for this purpose the reserves are taken to consist of assets denominated in SDRs and currencies. Gold may be used, however, if the debtor and creditor agree on this mode of settlement, which means that they must agree on a price for the gold. If a debtor no longer possesses ECUs, it may obtain them from the net accumulators of ECUs or from the EMCF. In a transaction with the EMCF, the debtor, in return for the ECUs, must contribute gold and U.S. dollars in the proportions in which it holds them in its reserves.

Central banks may transfer ECUs among themselves in other transactions in return for dollars, EC currencies, SDRs, or gold, but not if the sole purpose of the transaction is to change the composition of a central bank’s reserves. Gold may be used also in the liquidation provisions of the arrangements if a net user of ECUs must acquire them from a net accumulator, and if the parties are agreed on a transfer of gold and on the price at which the transfer is to take place.<sup><a id="Rch03fn265" href="https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/book/9781451981742/back-1.xml#ch03fn265">265</a></sup>
