For me it's important to read the 7E in a manner which isn't an automatic application of Marxism in every stage of the descriptions and explanations of Mariátegui (JCM). The recognition of the indigenous communities elaborated by JCM in his 7E occur in the context of the implantation of monopolist capital as the hegemonic transition from UK to the US was completing its initial phase in Peruvian society (1890-1930). Its implantation consists in taking control of the most profitable branches of industry by the monopolist capital of US corporations, mainly concentrated in industrial mining -Cerro de Pasco Corporation (CPC), oil (International Petroleum Corporation), but also in the control of infrastructure as rails (Grace and Co) (Mariátegui 1928, 21).

This contextualization of the 7E is instrumental because JCM is interpreting the beginning of the transition to capitalism through imperialism from a semi-feudal condition. The indigenous communities in the 1920s were not only economically keeping its features embodied in the organization of collective work, but also its ideas, indigenous socialist and revolutionary ideas were presented as an unexpected discovery of JCM and the anthropologist Luis E. Valcárcel among others, which anticipated the socialist politization which was developed by him and the socialist nucleus following the process of proletarization of peasantry.

JCM is opening his presentation of the pre-conquest nature or spontaneous character of indigenous communities is responsible with its description. First, JCM recognized in the pre-conquest indigenous communities an organic division of collective work mainly "agrarian", which is free and at the same time embedded in the Inka emporium. The conciliation of this economic freedom in the association of different indigenous communities in a mode of production which had a social utilitarian outcome, diverges from the notion of freedom which can be embedded in other "agrarian" modes of production under the military rule of other old Empires. 
The way in which JCM presented the junction of the Inka Empire rule and the collective organization of production is possible because of the different spirit of the indigenous communities, which isn’t based on a experience of the "agrarian" work as exploitation, but as a social duty of reciprocity with the others, not directed to pay rents or tribute. The productive outcome of this indigenous communities as the economic base of a particular mode of production had for JCM a different orientation, not possible to be reduced to accumulation, as money didn't appear as it appeared in other latitudes, as old imperial China. 

“The fruits of the soil cannot be hoarded. It is not plausible, therefore, that two-thirds were reserved for the consumption of the officials and priests of the empire. Much more plausible is that the crops that were supposedly reserved for the nobility and Inca leader were intended for state storehouses. And that they represent, in sum, an act of social providence, typical and characteristic of a socialist order.]” (Mariátegui 1928[2011], 96).

The outcome of the social production made by this indigenous communities had a distributional purpose; the outcome of production is oriented to the material wealth of the communities in the economic base, while at the same time is military useful for the Inka state class. When JCM is talking about the valorization of territory with the collective work of an enormous infrastructure, mostly connecting roads and water, is speaking within the utilitarian idea of wealth.

"The most admirable public works and collective works of Tawantinsuyu had a military, religious, or agricultural purpose. The highland and coastal irrigation channels, and the agricultural terraces in the Andes, are the best evidence of the degree of economic organization reached by Inka's Tawantinsuyo. All of the dominant features characterize their civilization as an agricultural civilization. “The land,” Valcárcel writes in his study of the economic life of Tawantinsuyu, in native tradition, is the common mother: not only food but man himself comes from her womb. Land provides all wealth. The cult of the Mama Pacha, Mother Earth, is on par with the worship of the sun, and such as the sun does not belong to anyone in particular, neither does the planet. Agrarianism was born from the twin concepts of **aboriginal ideology** of communal ownership of land and the universal  
religion of the sun" (Mariátegui 1928[2011], 72-73).  
  

In this manner the spontaneous and the free association of indigenous communities was possible to conceal with the existence of a ruling state class (Inkas) because of the different meaning that collective work have for the indigenous communities as something which is not sufferable, inclusive nowadays the community agrarian work in indigenous communities is more a collective dance with the soil than a mechanic activity for exhaustion and extraction, and its full of meaning and rituals.

Mariátegui quoted Castro Pozo’s work as an “integrated and documented defense of the Indigenous community [...] on socialist thought based on a concrete study of its nature and carried out according to the research methods of modem sociology and economics […] [T]he ayllu or community has preserved its natural idiosyncrasy, its character as almost a family institution within which its main constituent factors continued to persist after the conquest.” Here he is in agreement with Valcárcel, whose propositions in regard to the ayllu seem to some to be overdominated by the ideal of Indigenous resurgence.” (Mariátegui 1928[2011], 97).

The survival of the indigenous community under feudalism, and semi-feudalism under capitalist expansion, cannot be reduced to the description and analysis of institutions for labor, land property and state extraction. The indigenous communism is alive in the spirit of its sons and grandsons, detached from land by the violence of primitive accumulation and its sequel. The demonstration of the survival of indigenous socialism is not only in the “vestiges” left by the survival Indigenous communities until now, but also in the different types of communities which appears in the development of the semi-feudal condition and capitalist expansion as a whole process:

“Therefore, in Indigenous villages where families are grouped and bonds of heritage and communal work have been extinguished, strong and tenacious habits of cooperation and solidarity that are the empirical expression of a communist spirit still exist. The community draws on this spirit. It is their body. When expropriation and redivision seem about to liquidate the community, Indigenous socialism always finds a way to reject, resist, or evade it.” (Mariátegui 1928[2011], 98).

Mariátegui, work on the same direction as Castro Pozo, but as a committed and confessed Marxist. In this manner he examines the vestiges of indigenous communism using the light of Marxism to interpret the conditions of Peruvian society for a socialist revolution. The problem of the indigenous is, from his Marxist perspective, an economic and political problem, and its roots aren't in the ideology of race as nothing else but a dispositive for domination and justification for dispossession. The situation of the indigenous against which JCM is struggling is political and economic because it depends on the abolition of gamonalism, not only as an economic regime ruled by the upper rural class constituted by large landowners, and in this sense, dependent on the concentration of land property, forced labor, slavery, servitude, and tithe, but most important of its administration of the state bureaucracy.

The upper rural class which conserved itself in Peru after the fragmentation of latifundio within the republic period was converted in the bureaucratic bourgeoisie as a fraction of the political class structure of imperialism. JCM recognition of the indigenous problem as the land problem is oriented not only to challenge the oligarchy control of land in the Andes, but also to target the bureaucratic bourgeoisie, and in that manner attacked the political structure of imperialism during 1920s. The problem of the indigenous as the land problem, indeed, is not only economic but political, is a revindication which cannot be confused with any land reform as the liberal solution could imagine. In this manner JCM created a junction of the path to Peruvian revolution with socialism, also as an international struggle for peoples liberation. The indigenous revindication of land is part of the reversal of the colonized world for indigenous communities.

JCM points to the process of fragmentation of land ownership as a condition not only managed by capitalists for taking control of feudal and semi-feudal societies, weaking the economic base of wealth and its political control of the state, but also the survival of communities “under a system of servitude” (Mariátegui 1928[2011], 82) at the bottom of this dynamic of arrangements and institutions created by the statecraft for capitalist development. This process had divergent and contingent outcomes depending on the intensity and magnitude of its force against the feudal upper rural class, where the process of destruction of feudality finished it by World War I, principally in Europe, the capitalist development was under the free direction of imperialist bourgeoisies.

But this process could started with the distribution of large land holdings before the creation of the republic, as happened with the Russian mir (Mariátegui 1928[2011], 82), and continued under a system of servitude, where as in Peru and Russia the exploitation of communities of peasants was at the base of both reproduction of the remnants of feudalism (by servitude) and conciliated by the capitalists interests on the statecraft enterprise (by taxes). The difference is contingent to the revolutionary process, where Russia realized a socialist revolution, this process killed completely effective these feudal remnants, but later created a state class dependent on the rents provided by the extended exploitation of the proletaries sons and grandsons of peasant communities. 

In Peru, the revolutionary process didn’t develop effectively and couldn’t solve the land-indigenous problem, in this sense imperialism allows the formation of a weak oligarchy as a fraction of the bureaucratic bourgeoisie which its real power depends on their apparent management of the Peruvian state in absolute compliance to the commands of imperialist bourgeoisies.



Shawn:

"sympathetic to US" "less sympathetic with the importation of slaves". Critique of JCM by the use of *Vasconcelos (first indigeneity...)*, mestizaje as homogenization.
K.*A.*


