"The wealth of societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails appears as an immense collection of commodities..." (125). %%Comentario a Pie de pagina por traducción.%%

"Der Reichtum der Gesellschaften, in welchen kapitalistiche Produktionsweise herrscht, erscheint als eine ,,ungeheure Waren..."



What the wealth of capitalist societies is? 
Starting with the distinction of the two forms of value: values for use (use-value) and values for exchange (exchange value), Marx is setting up the foundations of his analysis of the accumulation of capital precisely as the process that creates the wealth of capitalist societies, which is nothing more than amassed human work for the creation of surplus value embodied in commodity-capital which in capitalist accumulation is converted in money-capital, the wealth of capitalist societies is an outcome of the reproduction of this process in which the surplus value contained in every commodity is accumulated as profits as a portion of the augmented money-capital which is sublimated from the process of material production.






Everything, every raw nature must be converted in raw material for the production of use-values in exchange relations -which in the social formation that prevailed as capitalism is- embedded, instrumentally oriented to the production of profits by the monetary consumption of the commodities produced by the capitalists using particular mechanisms which distinguish capitalism from other modes of production and social formations. 

The first chapter of Book 1 is dedicated by Marx to stablish at least three particularities of capitalism hided in the normalized functioning of its production and ideology. The first one -as I already was mentioning above-, is the reduction of every existing being in a raw material amassable for the process of production. This reduction of nature as a raw material is the sublimation of the other self-consciusness (external and independent) for the realization of the self-consciusness which claims it as a mean for satisfaction of necessities (imagined or not), in that manner not only reducing nature as a mean for, but also transforming itself (that self-consciousness) as sublimated from that independent and external object which it is serving from.
It is a first violent abstraction, because the transformation of every nature being to the material qualities which are useful for the knowledge and enjoyment of other self-consciusness, is concrete, violent with the external and independent existence of those beings.

In this point, the easy imagination of idealist philosophers would state using quotes of Marx, that the process of production of the means of life or subsistence is a Marxist statement, its not, its just an economic assumption or simplification used and continued by Marx for the development of his theory of the formation of value -exposed in some extent in Part I of Capital Book 1)-.
The distinction between use-values non mediated by work and use-values produced by it is relevant in the sense that is recognizing a superior metabolism from the social metabolism. This superior metabolism created use-values that are not use-values but are treated as if them are. A lagoon, an unplanted forest, a species of the nature being, are not mediated by the work process, can be mediated by history -as unfortunately and unvirtuously the ecological fatality of capitalism always demonstrated (not only in this current period)-, by the natural formation of this "thing" that is material of value. What is hidden in "values", as use-values, as commodities, is not only the valorization of work as creative forces of values, its also the valorization of the outcomes of history and social processes embodied in the conditions of life and production, means, instruments, and bodies of the workers. This premise is important because it allows the recognition of the real composition of surplus value, not only as unpaid concrete labor. The reduction of the composition of surplus value to some individualized non-paid concrete work of a human being in a workshop, field, or industrial building of whichever activity, is a convenient reduction of the nature of profit produced by capitalist exploitation, because it reduces the it sources to a surplus value directly related only to the unpaid work. Instead, surplus value hides as a source of profit, not only unpaid human life consumed concretely -aimed to- in the production of commodities, but also other temporal proceses and outcomes independent and external from the sublimation capacity of human self-consciousnes. In this sense every material of this reality have the potentiality to become free from the sublimation of self-consciusness not only by using it as objects of knowledge but also as their violent reduction and material embodiment as commodities.

The composition of surplus value is more complex than unpaid work also because this abstraction hold only for an individualized worker and anything else. -This totalitarian reduction of humans as worker machines is also real, precisely because of the violence of the process of exploitation for capital accumulation-. While in reality this worker have skin, sickness, and a quality unique, which is depreciated in the process of valorization of labor, but also have a social space, a territorial, ecological, material real existence in a superior metabolism, and is completely dependent of the material provision not only of nature as raw materials, but also of the social metabolism of capitalism or of the other social metabolisms that capitalism oppress in subsumption.

The quantified qualities of a nature being are always a reductive abstraction of the aimed desirable properties of it to the purposes of who is executing the knowledge or praxis of dominance and exploitation. In this abstract point, which constitutes a premise for the development of Marx analysis of commodities, for me, doesn't matter if this manner of existence or mode of relational being of sublimating/become sublimated is executed for the survivor or for the production of profits. 
The transformation of every nature being, every external and independent existence for the purposes or enjoyment of other self-being is an expansive and compulsive process of capitalism as a system aimed for capitalists, which is confused as a normalized feature of human existence and social reproduction. Its not, capitalism-nature fatal contradictions (denounced by Marxists political ecologists as O'Connor), as the acknowledged and meditated process of giving dead and agony to every nature being, had been and will be in incessant expansion and acceleration until capitalism will destroy its material conditions completely in a contingent manner. 

Extracting value from every being and everywhere with the incessant voracity of capitalists violence using every being human or not for their reproduction. This is what the process of alienation is also, a non-human praxis. Its not human because if not a praxis of species in general, self-destruction is a feature of social formations and specifically fatal in capitalism. The socialization of agony is the other face of the sublimating capacity of abstraction from the external and independent reality used by concrete self-consciusness. Those self-consciusnnes embodied, with similar material existence, impose capitalism as a situation for existence for humans and every nature being. This negative dialectic is realized by the the reproduction of capitalism as an expansive violent process of reduction of every being, human and not only human, for the purpose of the production of wealth. Which wealth? Well, it's the wealth formed, concretely produced by the exploitations of nature and human life, to the process of reproduction of profits derived from the incessant production and amassment of commodities and its realization in money-capital augmented. 

Marx is using a "bridge" left by Adam Smith which is employing the labor (not work) time as a measure from which two exchange values are related. This reduction of the exchange value of a use-value in terms of the proxy magnitude of time consumed for its production, reveals that the valorization process created by the work embodied in those commodities is at itself a determined abstraction with aimed to create profits, a measurement and equivalence made with the purpose of quantification of different qualities as homogeneous mass of congealed labor embodied in the produced commodities as a magnitude of exchange value ready to be processed as ultimate profit in the circuit of capital accumulation.

The second violent abstraction which is hidden in the capitalist production is the treatment of every use-value as an exchange value. The reason of this statement is not a condition of human existence, neither of the existence of any other species. What is this other dialectic movement? It's aimed too? Definitely. The reduction of every use-value to its exchange value form implies "the commercial knowledge of the commodity" (131). This means that every use-value reduced as a commodity implies the reduction of its value to the magnitude of exchange value. In this manner every use-value must be reduced to its exchange value form to be then instrumented as a commodity for the purposes of profit reproduction and capital accumulation.

A third violent abstraction from which capitalism as a system depends is the reduction of the concrete work involved in the production of every use-value to the amount or quantity of abstract labor expressed as the magnitude of exchange value for every commodity. This reduction of the concrete work, real life expended in time as a post-tempore and arbitrary measurement of the amount of abstract socially necessary labor proxy time, NOT ONLY hide the homogenization of the concrete work of different qualities as a mass of individualized congealed quantities of labor embodied in the commodities, already prone for its realization as cumulative augmented money-capital (M) through the consumption of their commodity-capital (C) form (MCM' simple circuit of accumulation).
The reduction of concrete work to abstract labor, useful for the capitalists (profit seeking) aims of the exchange of commodities, its violent because it is reducing the value of every use-value commercialized as a commodity to the individualized human labor employed in its production. 




This simplicity of the market as a benevolent space of transactions, is revealed too as the space in which the process of commodification and valorization work as labour are hidden.  




