For me it's important to read the 7E in a manner which isn't an application of Marxism in every stage of the descriptions and explanations of Mariátegui (JCM). While JCM is working to interpret the pre-conquest indigenous communities, he have clear that the categories developed in Marxism are made of the critic and revelations of capitalism mechanisms as an inhuman destructive system in its materiality, not only reduced to its political economy, but also completely operating in the ideology. Indeed, JCM is cautious enough in his understanding of the bases of the pre-conquest economy. It's necessary to start with his recognition of the indigenous communities while JCM is writing the 7E the implantation of monopoly capital is developing as the hegemonic transition from UK was completing. The transformation of the Peruvian economy in the shade of US imperialism started in the final 1890s and continues until 1930s, its implantation consists in taking control of the most profitable branches of industry by monopolist capital of US corporations, mainly the Cerro de Pasco Corporation (CPC), but also infrastructure as rails, and oil.(cita a 7s...). In this manner, the transition of the economic base of Peruvian society to capitalism, in an specific point of expansion consolidated in the 1930's of the implantation phase of a particular mode of capitalism in which the concentration and enchainment of the main branches of industry under the management of a particular fraction of the international bourgeoisie, is *one* of the main economic features of imperialism as a stage which started in the final *1890s* and is consistent with the US hegemonic transition elaborated by Arrighi and Silver, starting more or less in the same period. This contextualization of the 7E is instrumental because JCM is interpreting the beginning of the transition to capitalism through imperialism from a semi-feudal condition. The indigenous communities in the 1920s were not only economically keeping its particular features embodied in the organization of collective work, but also its ideas, indigenous socialist and revolutionary ideas were presented as an unexpected discovery of JCM and the anthropologist Luis E. Valcárcel, which anticipated the socialist politization which was developed by JCM and the socialist nucleus to the Peruvian society already in contact with Marxism and Europe, in that sense as it´s recognized Mariátegui was the most advanced expression of the modernity. But maybe precisely because of that condition, he avoid the use of Marxist categories when and where an unreflect or automatic application of Marxism could misinterpret and put conceptual boxes first and then fit them with phenomena.

The first two pages in which JCM is opening his presentation of the pre-conquest nature or spontaneous character of indigenous communities is responsable with its description. First, JCM recognized in the pre-conquest indigenous communities an organic division of collective work mainly "agrarian", which is free and at the same time embedded in the Inka emporium. The conciliation of this economic freedom in the association of different indigenous communities in a mode of production which had a social utilitarian outcome, diverges from the notion of freedom which can be embedded in other "agrarian" modes of production under the military rule of other old Empires, as maybe China.
The way in which JCM presented the junction of the Inka Empire rule and the collective organization of production is possible because of the different spirit of the indigenous communities, which wasn't experiment the "agrarian" work as exploitation but as a social duty of reciprocity with the others, not directed to pay rents or tribute. The productive outcome of this indigenous communities as the economic base of a particular mode of production had for JCM a different orientation, not possible to reduce as accumulation as the money didn't appear as it appeared in China Empire. The outcome of the social production made by this indigenous communities had a distributional purpose, the utilitarian idea of wealth, is compatible in this sense in which the outcome of social production is oriented to the material wealth of the communities in the economic base. When JCM is talking about the valorization of an enormous infrastructure, mostly connecting roads and water, is speaking within the utilitarian idea of wealth. The valorization of infrastructure is assigning value only to its collective use. The use and operative conditions of this infrastructure is disposable and maintained by the indigenous communities as the base of the economy under the rule of the Inka Empire. In this manner the spontaneous and the free association of indigenous communities is possible to conceal with the existence of a ruling state class because of the different meaning that collective work have for the indigenous communities as something which is enjoyable not sufferable, inclusive nowadays the community work in indigenous communities is more a collective dance with the soil than a mechanic activity for exhaustion and droughting, and its full of meaning and rituals. 