1. Línea editorial Octubre

October: Marxist Journal of Social Sciences and Political Economy
Octubre: Revista Marxista de Ciencias Sociales y Economía Política

Adorno. teoría crítica.

The development of critical theory at the present historical juncture is an instrument of struggle. Political sociology as a social science understanding the built of power from the bottom to the top, was excerpted from political economy. The critical power of historical political sociology was constrained by its divorce with the multiverse of Marxism, with differentiated ratios between the mainstream and the radical approaches for social change that are an integral part of it.

Campo disciplinario, anejado del marxismo, y su encuentro.
El desarrollo de teoría crítica y revolucionaria en la actual coyuntura histórica es instrumento de lucha y resistencia para los pueblos, y como tal, debe ser avanzada a la luz de los acontecimientos. Ha sido una virtud de la teoría revolucionaria que la lucha de clases decantó en el derrocamiento: análisis de clase a la luz de la crítica marxista a la economía política del imperialismo.
La sociología política que entiende la construcción del poder desde abajo hacia arriba, fue extraída de la economía política. El poder crítico de la sociología política histórica se vio limitado por su divorcio con el marxismo, con proporciones diferenciadas entre la corriente principal y los enfoques radicales para el cambio social como parte integrante.

octubre:

Rusia: 

China:

Ecuador:

Octubre representa una cadena de episodios de cambio histórico que con su desarrollo alcanzaron enormes transformaciones en la consciencia y en el futuro de los pueblos que en resistencia y lucha histórica han venido trabajando una alternativa de vida y de organización que va más allá de la lucha por su liberación y se ha convertido en una lucha abierta por la defensa de la biodiversidad, y de las fuentes de vida que son el agua, la tierra, el aire contra la destrucción total que ejecuta la minería a gran escala en los páramos que reservan y purifican el agua, en los cerros que nos protegen, en la lagunas y ojos de agua que nos dan de vivir, no solo a los humanos que no comemos oro, ni cobre, ni plata, ni uranio, ni litio, ni arsénico, sino a toda las especies que se conectan con los ríos de la Amazonía, pulmón de la humanidad.



Dear Kevin,

I hope you are doing well this summer. I wanted to consult you because I’m back to Adorno’s works, and I was thinking if maybe you would recommend a particular English translator for his following:

1. _Dialektik der Aufklärung_:

1.1)              Adorno, Theodor W., and Max Horkheimer. _Dialectic of Enlightenment_. **Translated by John Cumming**. London: Verso Editions, 1979.

1.2)              ———. _Dialectic of Enlightenment_ _: Philosophical Fragments_. Edited by Gunzelin Schmid Noerr. **Translated by E. F. N. Jephcott**. Cultural Memory in the Present. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 2002.

2. _Negative Dialektik_:

2.1)             Adorno, Theodor W. _Negative Dialectics_. **Translated by E. B. Ashton**. A Continuum Book. New York: Seabury Press, 1973.

2.2)             Adorno, Theodor W. _Lectures on Negative Dialectics_ _: Fragments of a Lecture Course 1965/1966_. Edited by Rolf. Tiedemann. **Translated by Rodney Livingstone**. Cambridge: Polity, 2008.

I’m writing a text for an editorial policy oriented to recognize the necessity of development of critical and revolutionary theory-praxis in social sciences scientific communication, considering Adorno's powerful critique to reductionism and Hegel negative dialectics as a source of totalitarian violence: the abstract violence which occurs earlier in theory, later becomes absolute violence in praxis. Paraphrasing your use of the terms _abstract_ and _absolute_ to describe the stages of dialectics as double negation following Lenin’s interpretation of Hegel’s _Logic_, within the framework of Adorno’s critique to reductionism and totalitarianism.

One of the main ideas of the text is to recognize the necessity of reconnect the radical trends in social sciences with the multiverse of Marxism trajectories, joint in the development of critical and revolutionary theory _instrumental_ for the environmental justice struggles in Latin America. By approaching the relation between theory and praxis from a Marxist perspective, bringing back-in the debate about radical means and aims of social transformation, as a critical concern for class consciousness and class struggle development and trajectories. The operation of abstract subsumption occurs in theory, reducing the diversity of concrete existences to an abstract conceptual identity, and then accelerating its development in a second absolute negation by the “real” subsumption of the diversity of existences first subsumed “formally” by the reductive violence of theory under a false sublimated substitute identity, then realized in fascist praxis, materially suppressing the concrete existences, by annihilation: as Nazism with Jewish and Zionism with Palestinians peoples.

The operation of abstract subsumption occurs in theory first, reducing the diversity of concrete existences to an abstract conceptual identity, and then accelerating its development in a second absolute negation by the “real” subsumption of the diversity of existences first subsumed “formally” by the reductive violence of theory under a false sublimated substitute identity, realized in fascist praxis as a second instance by which the material concrete existences are objects of annihilation: as Nazism with Jewish and Zionism with Palestinians peoples.

I hope you are doing well this summer. I wanted to consult you because I’m back to Adorno’s works, and I was thinking if maybe you would recommend a particular English translator for his following:

Bibliographic References consultation