***Summary***

Scale Shift in Peruvian Anti-Mining Contention. Theory Building From The Struggle Against The Exploration Of Cerro Quilish In Cajamarca



One of the fields of political conflict in which the new cycle of anti-neoliberal mobilization is expressed is the extractive contention. Cajamarca is one of the departments of Peru where large-scale mining expanded during the 90's, as an expression or consequence of the institutional changes associated with the economic liberalization process. In the districts of Cajamarca, La Encañada and Baños del Inca, in the province of Cajamarca, Minera Yanacocha has been operating since 1992, as the face of the coalition between the US extractive capital of the Newmont Mining Corporation and one of the most powerful oligarchic mining groups in Peru controlled by the oligarchic Benavides' family: Minera Buenaventura. Minera Yanacocha began its operations in Cajamarca in an institutional context shaped by the constitutional change of 1993 and the application of the structural adjustment reforms associated with the so-called "Washington Consensus". In this sense, Minera Yanacocha's extractive intervention in Cajamarca is part of a wave of foreign direct investment in the mining sector, attracted by a set of formal institutions designed to suit the profits of extractive capital and a rentier state such as Peru's. The anti-mining struggle in Cajamarca draws a field of struggle that includes organizational structures such as peasant nigh watchers, irrigation committees, unions, fronts, NGOs, subnational parties, as well as ecological discourses and political identities rooted in the peasantry and in the logic of the Peruvian left.
The challenge that the anti-mining contentious campaign against the exploration of Cerro Quilish represented for the extractive coalition between the Peruvian state, the oligarchic mining elites, the transnational mining groups and the political class that dominates the establishment, exhibits the escalation of its institutional, categorical and territorial effects. Likewise, the cancellation of the mining exploration project "Yanacocha Sur – Porcón River Basin – Cerro Quilish" is also evidence of the effectiveness of the contentious collective action for environmental demands with specific obstructive performances.
In this sense, this research evidences the operation of the process of change of scale in the Peruvian anti-mining struggle based on the study of the department of Cajamarca as a typical case in which the deepening of neoliberalism is expressed with mining extractivism, and which at the same time presents high subnational political fragmentation. This case study oriented to the construction of theory, traces the process of change of scale in the anti-mining conflict of Cajamarca, evidencing the operation of some relational, cognitive and environmental mechanisms proposed for the explanation of the relationship between mining and conflict. The evidence presented was constructed from the analysis of the Social Protest Base of Peru, as well as the archive of local newspapers and interviews.