% interactcadsample.tex
% v1.03 - April 2017

\documentclass[]{interact}

\usepackage{epstopdf}% To incorporate .eps illustrations using PDFLaTeX, etc.
\usepackage{subfigure}% Support for small, `sub' figures and tables
%\usepackage[nolists,tablesfirst]{endfloat}% To `separate' figures and tables from text if required

\usepackage{natbib}% Citation support using natbib.sty
\bibpunct[, ]{(}{)}{;}{a}{}{,}% Citation support using natbib.sty
\renewcommand\bibfont{\fontsize{10}{12}\selectfont}% Bibliography support using natbib.sty

\theoremstyle{plain}% Theorem-like structures provided by amsthm.sty
\newtheorem{theorem}{Theorem}[section]
\newtheorem{lemma}[theorem]{Lemma}
\newtheorem{corollary}[theorem]{Corollary}
\newtheorem{proposition}[theorem]{Proposition}

\theoremstyle{definition}
\newtheorem{definition}[theorem]{Definition}
\newtheorem{example}[theorem]{Example}

\theoremstyle{remark}
\newtheorem{remark}{Remark}
\newtheorem{notation}{Notation}

\begin{document}

\articletype{JWSR resubmission draft, July 2024}

\title{Antisystemic Effects of Antimining Andean Peasant Struggles}

\author{
\name{José Manuel Mejía V.\thanks{CONTACT José Manuel Mejía V. Email: mejiavillena@ucsb.edu} }
\affil{Department of Sociology, University of California Santa Barbara, 3305 Social Sciences and Media Studies Bld., Santa Barbara, CA, USA}
}

\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
The metabolic structural processes of the capitalist world-economy have produced historical antisystemic resistances with world-scale effects over capital's extended reproduction. The history of the Andean indigenous and cholo peasantry struggles against colonial and imperialist mining constituted a new political identity in absolute contradiction with the dispossession and destruction of land and water as vital values for their social reproduction. While theory has been developed about the antisystemic effects of social movements created by the systemic processes of the world-economy, theorizing on their causal mechanisms is a work in progress, permeable to be developed broadly within a Marxist critique of imperialism political economy. In this article, a causal mechanisms hypothesis is built to explain the world-scale effects of antimining struggles over the finance capital reproduction circuit of mining imperialists bourgeoisies in competition under the gradual breakout conditions of shared imperialism in Los Andes from three case studies: i) the cholo-peasantry antimining struggles in Cajamarca (Peru) during the 2004 and 2011-2012 against the Newmont Gold Mining Corporation headed in the U.S., ii) the indigenous-peasantry mining struggles in Apurímac (Peru) during 2015 and 2019 against the MMG of China Minmetals Corporation (CMC), and iii) the indigenous-cholo peasantry antimining struggles in Cotopaxi (Ecuador) during 2023-2024 against the Atico Mining Corporation headed in Canada. The theory-building case studies conducted have been nurtured by fieldwork, archive research, and protest event data analysis to evidence the consistency of the hypothesis stated on the antisystemic effects of antimining struggles.
\end{abstract}

\begin{keywords}
Peru; Ecuador; China; United States of America; Canada; Antimining struggles; Antisystemic; Capital reproduction; Mining; Imperialism 
\end{keywords}

\begin{abstract}
Los procesos metabólicos de reproducción de la economía-mundo capitalista han producido históricamente resistencias antisistémicas con efectos a escala mundial sobre la reproducción extendida del capital. Las luchas del campesinado cholo-indígena contra la minería colonial e imperialista en Los Andes forman un sujeto político en absoluta contradicción con el despojo y la destrucción de la tierra y el agua como valores vitales para su reproducción social. Si bien se ha desarrollado teoría sobre los efectos antisistémicos de los movimientos sociales creados con los procesos sistémicos de la economía-mundo, la teorización sobre los mecanismos causales que pueden explicar dichos efectos, es una labor en curso permeable a ser desarrollada a la luz de una crítica marxista a la economía política del imperialismo. En este artículo, construyo una hipótesis de mecanismos causales para explicar los efectos antisistémicos de las luchas antimineras sobre la reproducción del capital financiero circulado en la industria minera por burguesías imperialistas en competencia bajo condiciones de ruptura progresiva del imperialismo compartido en Los Andes, a partir de tres estudios de caso: i) las luchas antimineras del campesinado cholo en Cajamarca (Perú) durante los años 2004 y 2011-2012 contra la Newmont Gold Mining Corporation asentada en EE.UU., ii) las luchas del campesinado indígena en Apurímac (Perú) durante 2015 y 2019 contra la MMG de la China Minmetals Corporation (CMC), y iii) las luchas antimineras campesinas cholo-indígenas en Cotopaxi (Ecuador) durante 2023-2024 contra la canadiense Atico Mining Corporation. Los estudios de caso realizados para la construcción de teoría se han nutrido de trabajos de campo, revisión de archivos, así como del análisis de catálogos de eventos de protesta para evidenciar la consistencia de la hipótesis construída sobre los efectos antisistémicos de las luchas antimineras.
\end{abstract}

\begin{keywords}
Perú; Ecuador; China; Estados Unidos; Canadá; luchas anti-mineras; anti-sistémico; reproducción de capital; minería; imperialismo 
\end{keywords}

\section{Introduction}
The effects of the antisystemic resistance of the antimining movement in the Andes express the advance of the development of the class struggle in the identity formation of historical challengers in absolute antagonism to the reproduction of the imperialists mining bourgeoisies finance capital through the mining circuit of accumulation. Mining in the Andes is at the center of the foundational processes of the modern world-system and in the metabolic processes of reproduction of financial capital in today's imperialist world-economy. The development of the processes of production and circulation of colonial and imperialist mining, and gold mining in particular, have structured the social formation and historical resistance of the indigenous and cholo peasantry in the Andes, against militarism, dispossession and expansive destruction of the vital values for their social reproduction: water and land.

This is evidenced by the genocide of the native peoples of Abya Yala, the exploitation of the survivors in colonial mining, as well as the massacres of their children and grandchildren, indigenous peasants and cholos, proletarianized with the imperialist implantation of monopolist financial capital inter-"nationalized" in mining enclaves. Militarism as a policy of expansion of the imperialists bourgeoisies to control or guarantee the functioning of the mining circuit for the reproduction of their financial capital, is a persistent feature of the coloniality of the current mining problem. As well as a nodal point of his anti-imperialist solution in the Andes. Both in the formation of the modern world-system that began in the sixteenth century, and in the configuration of the imperialist world-economy in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the massacres and exploitation of the indigenous peasantry and their proletarianized sons and grandsons in Los Andes operated as a constant under colonial mining and imperialist mining. 

Colonial mining in the Andes was the foundational method of the expanded primitive accumulation of the sixteenth century (Marx 1867, 874-875, 915) corresponding to the material expansion of the European oligarchic banking bourgeoisies (Arrighi 1994) that emerged from the concentration of merchant capital in the Middle East during the thirteenth century (Abu-Lughod 1991), shaping the modern world-system. Imperialist mining is a vital process of production and hoarding for the extended reproduction of financial capitals with differentiated trajectories of centralization and concentration (Bukharin 1916) that guarantee their inter-"nationalization" through militarism (Luxemburg 1913). 

In their effort to conceptualize the antisystemic effects of movements formed by the systemic structural processes of the world-economy, Arrighi et al. (1989, 90) emphasized that the new antisystemic social formations and the severity of their effects are structured by the centralization of capital as a highly developed world-scale trend under the imperialist world-economy. However, the causal mechanisms that connect the constitution of antisystemic identities in absolute denial with the expansive need of the metabolism of reproduction of contending financial capitals with different levels of centralization and concentration have not yet been evidenced. 

The mining resistance of historical antisystemic defiants in the Andes forming in absolute denial of the reproduction of financial capital through the obstruction of the operation and inter-"national" militarist expansion of its circuit of mining accumulation, is evidence of the advanced development of the history of the class struggle. How can we explain the antisystemic effects of the mining struggles in the Andes on the reproduction of contending financial capital? 

I state the following hypothesis: that the effects of the historical antisystemic resistances formed by the expansive structural processes, vital for the reproduction of contending financial capitals under an imperialist world-economy, are real because of their consequences. The antimining struggles have effects on a world-scale on the decrease in the expected rate of profit due to: i) the obstruction of the time of circulation in the transformation of surplus value into profit, ii) the hoarding of gold by consortium's of bank capitalists, iii) as well as in the organic composition of the financial capital invested in the mining circuit of reproduction, and iv) in the competition for the material expansion of the circuit of reproduction of financial capital, expressed in militaristic extractive interventions and new imperialist wars of distribution.

\section{Antisystemic resistance of historical challengers: the antimining movement of the indigenous-cholo Andean peasantry}

The formation of the class structure of the modern world-system is founded on the racialized international division of labor produced by colonization as a policy of expansion of merchant capital. Around ten million “indigenous" survived the genocide planned in Los Andes of an estimated total of sixty five million exterminated over the continental “America", being sublimated as inferior beings and reduced to mere labor force by the colonization method of primitive accumulation (Marx [1886]1976:873–875, 914; Mariátegui, January 16, 1929:78; Quijano and Wallerstein 1992; Quijano [1999], 2007, 169-170; Mignolo 2011, 183–84).

The world no longer fit into the consciousness of the survivors. But in their collective consciousness a myth survived. Or a myth makes sense in our consciousness, it is the myth of the new indigenous, of the Inkarri (the Inka return), of the Yawar-Inti (Sun of Blood) and the resurgence of the “indigenous" world by a revolutionary vendetta. In opposition to Arboleda's (2020) interpretation of the formation of indigenous “identity politics"\footnote{Martín Arboleda stated: ““Already in the 1990s, before socalled “identity politics” gained prominence in international academic circles, Ecuadorian philosopher Bolívar Echeverría—a renowned theoretician of cultural syncretism and capitalist modernity in Latin America—was already puzzled by the self-defeating cultural essentialisms of emerging variants of Latin American indigenous politics. Pre-Hispanic cultures in the Americas, he argued, were undergirded by profoundly relational cosmologies and hence were unable to perceive the “Other” as independent alterity. The otherness they perceived in the Spanish colonizers was for them a mere variant of the sameness of their own collective self. The European mindset, on the other hand, always construed the cultural other in terms of radical alterity, as absolute negation of their own identity” (Arboleda 2020:210).}, I argue that the revolutionary subjectivity that conjures up indigenous socialism is a historical formation in movement, a block of living historical text clashing, developing the peasantry as an antagonist class in formal subsumption since the sixteenth century. 

For both Arboleda (2020) and Bolívar Echevarría, the indigenous peoples could not understand the antagonism between them and the Spaniards. Their cosmology, they believe, did not allow the indigenous to realize that they were being killed by an external collective antagonistic to their lives or “collective self." If someone follows that argument, by implication this indigenous “self-defeating cultural essentialisms" would only change with the later appropriation of Hegelian logic as the basement for the reproduction of the sublimating rationality of “European mentality". By implication, its since the encounter of the “indigenous" peoples with this “European mentality" that their descendants are able to interpret “the cultural other in terms of radical otherness, as an absolute negation of its own identity". In short, it must be understood that Bolívar Echevarría should have ideologically omitted the work of the Peruvian anthropologist Luis E. Valcárcel, so as not to force an approximation to the work of José Carlos Mariátegui, who found an indigenous revolutionary subject already in motion when they were going to work on its politicization at the beginning of the twentieth century. Fortunately, the work of Alberto Flores Galindo ([1985]2010) did justice to this problem by tracing the myth of the Inkarri in indigenous and popular struggles emblematic of the history of Peru. 

As the first worker-intellectuals became the prophets of this myth, indigenous socialism was forged in the early twentieth century as the convergence of the “cholo group"\footnote{The “cholo group" is a social stratum which formation arises from the mass of the servile or semi-servile indigenous peasantry, differentiated by the incorporation of elements of Western-Creole culture. However, at the same time, they sustain, preserve, and recognize their difference and their origins in the indigenous culture and in the social structure of the indigenous peasantry, as the social formation from which we depart (Quijano 1980:63-65).} with the indigenous peasantry in historical resistance. The work of socialist politicization undertaken by Mariátegui, Mayer and Valcárcel (among others) in the organization of the bases of socialism in Peru and in the creation of indigenous socialism, they found already in motion the myth of indigenous resurgence. In which framework of interpretation, the revolution is carried out as vendetta for the new indigenous, their remnants, their sons and grandsons. The socialist revolution as a movement and horizon was already operating in Los Andes, when El Amauta José Carlos Mariátegui and the cholo group which he constituted with other intellectual workers of the proletariat in formation, began their work of politicization. 

Mariátegui wrote in the prologue to Valcárcel's Tempest in the Andes (1927): “I remember the unexpected and impressive type of agitator I found four years ago in the indigenous from Puno, Ezequiel Urviola. This meeting was the greatest surprise that Peru had in store for me on my return from Europe. Urviola represented the first spark of a fire that was to come. He was the revolutionary indigenous, the socialist indigenous. Tuberculous, hunchbacked, he succumbed after two years of tireless work. Today it does not matter that Urviola does not exist. It is enough that he existed. As Valcárcel says, today the mountains are pregnant with spartacus" (Mariátegui in the prologue to Valcárcel 1927:11).

The history of the class struggle in the Andes definitely precedes socialism, but most important, the indigenous-cholo peasantry learned to instrumentalize it. Thus, by the first quarter of the twenty-first century, the indigenous-cholo peasantry has not only effectively instrumentalized socialism (and Marxism) but also environmentalism (Mejía 2021), fixing its discursive articulation on the recognition of sensitive entities such as mountains, rivers, and lagoons (de la Cadena 2020). As De la Cadena emphasized about the visionary work of José María Arguedas: “[t]he totality, Todas las Sangres proposed an alternative indigenous social movement, a critical ally of the modern left, but with its own a-modern hybrid logic. Literacy and modern politics were important, but they had to be used and translated selectively, rather than eradicating indigenous customs" (2005:18). 

Hybridity in this sense is performative and not a reproduction of Western modernization as acculturation, but rather the cholos as indigenous descendants have been building their own cultural logic that recognizes their origins, while appropriating Western-modern cultural objects, as we do with the socialist and ecological frames of interpretation in the mining and mining struggles of the twenty-first century. As evidence the three case studies: i) the cholo-peasantry antimining struggles in Cajamarca (Peru) during the 2004 and 2011-2012 against the Newmont Gold Mining Corporation headed in the U.S., ii) the indigenous-peasantry mining struggles in Apurímac (Peru) during 2015 and 2019 against the MMG of China Minmetals Corporation (CMC), and iii) the indigenous-cholo peasantry antimining struggles in Cotopaxi (Ecuador) during 2023-2024 against the Atico Mining Corporation headed in Canada. The cholo-indigenous peasantry updated their interpretation of mining from a class perspective, nurtred by ecological discourses and indigenous cosmopolitics (de la Cadena 2020) in the defense of water, land, life and biodiversity. 

\subsection{The Historical Resistance of the Cholo-Indigenous Peasant Struggles Against Imperialist Mining in the Andes}

Imperialist mining is a central productive and hoarding process for the extended capital reproduction of the bank state capitalists trusts, as the most advanced economic formations of the world-economy of imperialism\footnote{“[W]orld  economy includes all these economic phenomena which, all  in all, are based on the relations between human beings engaged in the process of production. By and large, the whole  process of world economic life in modern times reduces itself  to the production of surplus value and its distribution among the various groups and sub-groups of the bourgeoisie on the  basis of an ever widening reproduction of the relations between two classes —the class of the world proletariat on the one hand and the world bourgeoisie on the other" (Bukharin [1915]1988:26-27).} in competition for their inter-“nationalization".\footnote{This concept is widely explained in the next section.}
Although the institutional and military foundations of imperialist domination in Los Andes were settled with the implantation of the monopolistic finance capital of the most centralized capitalists trusts\footnote{“The development of joint  stock companies, which made it possible to use the capital of  a considerable number of individual entrepreneurs, and which  radically undermined the principle of individual ownership of  enterprises, created the prerequisites for large monopolistic associations of entrepreneurs. Concentration of capital assumed  a new form here, namely, the form of concentration in trusts.
Capital accumulation no more increased the capital of individual producers; it turned into a means of increasing the capital of entrepreneurs’ organizations.[...] The individual  production branches are in various ways knit together into one collective body, organized on a large scale. Finance capital seizes the entire country in an iron grip. “National economy” turns into one gigantic combined trust whose partners are the financial groups [banks] and the state. Such formations we call state capitalist trusts" (Bukharin [1915]1988:117-118).} of the U.S., through extractive enclaves on the most profitable industries of the semi-colonial “national-economies" of Los Andes during the period 1895 to 1930 (citar Cueva y Quijano ademas de mariategui). From the beginning of the twentieth century, the mining industry in the Andes was under the almost exclusive control of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie. Mining was one of the industries where capitalism developed most rapidly, especially in the Andes, where from 1895 monopoly capital was directed toward large-scale mining, oil production, and agriculture Peru (Mariátegui 1928:21:REVISAR; Quijano 1988:116-21).

In fact, the mining struggles of the central Peruvian highlands workers unions were executing active antisystemic resistance since their genesis in the first miners strike against the Cerro de Pasco Corporation (CPC) of January 7, 1919 - inspired in the advancements of the proletariat in Europe and the Soviet Revolution of October 1917 (Melgar Bao 2020, 132)- until the end of the 1980s.  The processes of union formation and politicization of the mining proletariat of the central highlands of Peru went through a trajectory of radicalization during most of the twentieth century. This trajectory of radicalization diffused to the medium and small mines at the national level, as well as to the mines of the southern highlands –as was evidenced by the massacres of 1957 and 1966 in the mines of Toquepala (Moquegua) exploited by the Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC)–. Mines opened for the "nationalization" of the finance capital of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie through the Cuajone contract, secretly signed by the "nationalist" military government of Velasco Alvarado.\footnote{The Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC) was founded in 1952 by the American Mining and Smelting Company (ASARCO), which at the first decade of the 1900s operated the mining reproduction circuit of the finance capital bearers, as the Phelps Dodge Overseas Capital Company, the Cerro de Pasco Corporation (CPC), and the Newmont Mining Company, which concentrated already by 1901 20 percent of copper melting and 15 percent of copper refinement at a world-scale (Pérez-Jiménez 2018:490). Evidencing the continuum of exclusive monopolistic operation of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisies centralized formations in Peru during the complete twentieth century.}

While during the 1980s, the co-optation of the mining workers unions of the Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC) was consolidated as a result of the enforcement of its institutionalization trajectory. Meanwhile, the intensity and harshness of the militarism executed against the protests of the mining workers in the central Peruvian highlands exploited by the Cerro de Pasco Copper Corporation (CPC), evidenced the disruptiveness of the transgression carried out by the mining workers struggles as a direct challenge to the main reproduction circuit of capital accumulation. The systematic application of his militarism policy over the copper mines of the central highlands of Peru since 1903 was evidenced by the massacres of Malpaso (1930), Cobriza (1971), as well as the militarized repression of the miners' strike campaign of the mid-80s, repressed with the imprisonment of hundreds of unionized miners. and the assassination of Saúl Cantoral in 1988 by the "Rodrigo Franco Commando" task force, a paramilitary criminal organization for annihilation that operated under the first government of Alan García.

However, the radicalization of the miners' protests developed in the face of militarized repression. The formation of a vanguard of the Peruvian proletariat in open confrontation with the U.S. imperialist mining bourgeoisie, developed until the 1980s, when the PCP-SL and the MRTA began armed struggles in Peru. The trajectory of radicalization of the struggles of the miners became an anti-imperialist challenge, operated in a context characterized by the escalation of the armed struggle in Latin America, and mainly by the resolution of the imperialist struggle between the U.S.S.R. and the U.S., defined by the consequences of the Sino-Soviet secession.

The formation of the basis for the horizontal centralization of Sino-American finance capital developed, gradually after the shared imperialist resolution of the Vietnam War, and the subsequent implementation of market reforms in China by Deng XiaoPing in 1978. Until the early years of the 21st century, marked by the September 11 attacks on Wall Street, the Pentagon and the White House. When, under conditions of shared imperialism, these financial capitals begin a process of separation and rupture, gradually reducing their horizontal centralization. Thus, constraining the inter-"nationalization" of U.S. bank capitals as finance capital circulating through the economic formations of China's industrial production.

Indeed, U.S. and China imperialists bourgeoisies share the conditions of accumulation for their mutually consented capital concentration and inter-"nationalization" in the period between the 70s and the first decade of the 2000s, with a breaking point in 2008 denoting the asymmetry of their rates of profit, considering as an indicator the money-capital amount accounted for its gold reserves, as surplus-value congealed under the shape of gold-commodity-capital and gold-money-capital at the same time (Figure 4).

The advanced inter-“nationalization" of the Chinese finance capital during the 2000s executed by a higher centralized China state capitalists trust, gradually took advantage of the institutional and military conditions established by the U.S. imperialists bourgeoisies to operate in Peru. In twenty years, China's state capitalists trust finance capital built a considerable expansion of its participation in Peruvian copper mining, although still incipient in gold mining, through the China Minmetals Corporation (CMC).

The differentiated imperialists mining bourgeoisies are in the core of the inter-"nationalized" organization of finance capital, subjugating the industrial mining production of the semi-colonial "national-economies" in Los Andes, to the whole circuit of reproduction of the highest economic formations resultant from different trajectories of centralization at a "national-economy" scale. Correspondent to the higher levels of capital concentration of the world-economy of imperialism, since the transition from Great Britain to the U.S. modern world-system hegemony, around the first years of the "long twentieth century".

Under this situation of shared imperialism in Los Andes, a political regime of militarism and terrorist state violence is indiscreetly instrumentalized to guarantee the maximums rate of surplus-value and rate of profit for the top-layer economic formations at a world-scale. Nevertheless, the horizontal decentralization of Sino-American financial capital have differentiated effects for the accumulation circuit of each imperialist bourgeoisie, according to its own levels of concentration and centralization. In addition, the effects on a world-scale of the advanced horizontal decentralization of Sino-American finance capitals, exhibit differentiated consequences on the systemic structural processes of production and circulation, giving shape to the next transitory formation that necessarily will imply a new international division of labor.

\section{The antisystemic effects hypothesis for antimining struggles}

The advancement of money-capital by bank capitalists through the circuit of mining reproduction in Los Andes produces surplus-value shaped and weighted as commodity-capital ready for being converted in the total profit form of surplus-value by its market sale, in which case its surplus-value form is gone. But, in the case of gold, at the same time can be accounted as money-capital being transformed into profit by its exchange for pure currency money-capital, or can either still being gold hoarded under its commodity-capital shape (see Figure 2 and Figure 3). In that manner, gold retains its surplus-value form embodied in the volume of gold commodity-capital produced by determined organic composition of finance capital, advanced for mining under concrete natural, cultural, and historical conditions. 

The natural and cultural conditions are determinant for the reproduction of the finance capital invested in mining production and commercialization by bank state capitalists trusts. When the economic formations developed with the concentration and centralization processes at the "national-economy" saturated its scale, the fierce competition for a highly advanced inter-"nationalization" development operate by the pure militarism of imperialists wars in Ukraine, Palestine, and sooner Taiwan. And by imperialists securitization interventions on semi-colonial "national-economies", as the militarized repression over the massive mobilizations of Chile (2019), Ecuador (2019), Colombia (2020-2022), Peru (2022-2023), and most recently Venezuela (2024).

For inter-“nationalization" we mean the process in which bank capitalists trusts organizes the allocation of their money-capital threw as “foreign direct investment" to the most profitable and strategic industries, becoming finance capital situated in the territory of a semi-colonial state for the aims of its reproduction. Taking advantage of the wages differences correspondent to the imperialism world-economy division of labor hidden by the less mysterious and elder phenomenon of “globalization", “transnationalization", or "inter-nationalization" of production (Marx [1864-1865]2017:47-54; Marx [30 April 1868]1988:21-24; Bukharin [1915]1966:17-18, 53, 60-62; Lenin 1916:260, 265-266, 278-279).

The bank capitalists state trusts investments are backed up in gold-money-capital proportional to its potential amount of money-capital which is able to realize its circulation by the process of transformation of surplus-value into profit. Guaranteeing its differentiated reproduction scales for a further stage of capitalism development, at a historical time in which the irresolute tendency of its contradictions are expressed in the ecological, productive and shared imperialism crisis. 

Far away from the reality brought from an ideological dissociation of the money-capital hegemonic currency\footnote{The SDR funds operated as a currency for the transactions between the International Monetary Fund members and was built as a prospective hegemonic multi-currency financial asset, which is another shape of money-capital with a weight in gold-capital holdings created from a calculation weighted in relation to five of the ten most important bank capitalists state trusts represented in their correspondent currencies at a fixed price. (citar Elena Flor SDR)} and gold-capital, as is recently being suggested by the revival of the Triffin's dilema which anticipated the relation between the depreciation of the US$ as hegemonic currency and the appreciation of gold. 

This imagined disassociation of money-capital from gold-capital is contradicted by the dynamics of the total reserves holdings of the most centralized formations for capital reproduction developed in a century -and a half?- of imperialism world-economy. And with the fierce militarist contention between imperialists bourgeoisies as the class formed by the bank capitalists state trusts organizing throw the internationalization of the finance capital lend by those top formations of imperialism world-economy controlling the most profitable and strategic capitalist industry: mining, and gold mining specifically.\footnote{The size and quality of the mines opened in Los Andes located in volcanic geological formation are abundant in copper and gold, mainly, and the perforations required for the exploitation of the minerals evidence the liberation of arsenic into the underground water sources, permeating the soil as the main epidemiological structural threat of contamination with extremely compared magnitudes in Latin America (cita arsenico en america latina)}  

The antimining struggles have antisystemic effects obstructing the circuit of mining reproduction of certain finance capitals. By obstructive performances of struggle, the indigenous-cholo peasantry blockade the production and transportation of a compromised volume of mining commodity-capital, during an expected circulation time and with a predetermined organic composition. The increment of the time of circulation in the transformation of surplus-value into profit, delays the consumption of the finance capital invested in constant capital, increasing the difference between the rate of surplus-value and the rate of profit, an indeed transforming a reduced magnitude of surplus-value into total profit. 

Marx: s/k = p s/v = s k=c+v s'-p'= d' d'= sc/vk sc/vk=(f)c

As a whole, the reproduction of a certain capital implies the transformation of money-capital into productive-capital by an expected rate of profit equal to the ratio between the surplus-value already frozen in certain volume of commodity-capital produced by the exploitation of advanced unpaid concrete labor– ready for consumption on the market at a price fixed in indiscriminate upward rises since 1971; and the total capital advanced (Marx [1864-1865]2017: 49-55; Bukharin [1915]1966, 81-82).

Indeed, the circuit of capital accumulation of the imperialist bourgeoisies cannot achieve the conversion of their finance capital into increased money-capital by profit. Because of the operation of the following mechanisms: i) the delay in the circulation time of the transformation of surplus-value into total profit, ii) disrupt the expected magnitudes of finance capitals organic composition advanced in the production of surplus-value and in its posterior transformation into total profit, which iii) trigger the gold hoarding by imperialists bank state trusts, and iv) challenges its militarist competition by means of imperialist wars or imperialists interventions for determining the relations of production at the "national" economies in which the mining precious "raw" materials are situated.

In this sense, the indigenous-cholo peasantry struggles challenge the circulation of the productive capital of the imperialists mining bourgeoisies by obstructing the production and circulation of mining commodities. The circuit of capital accumulation of the imperialist bourgeoisies cannot achieve the conversion of their productive capital into increased money-capital, that is, the transformation of surplus-value into profit. If mineral raw materials are not sold on the international market, the financial capital invested in mining cannot yield profits. 

The mining dependence of capitalist industries that effectively offers a rate of profit of the magnitude of interest for competing imperialist bourgeoisies, such as the war industry, the space industry and the computer and high-tech industries. It also suggests an analysis of the effects on a world scale of the mining struggles due to their consequences on the time of circulation and the organic composition of capital in the transformation of surplus value into profit. Determined by the natural, cultural and historical as is evidenced by the historical antisystemic resistance of the Andean indigenous-cholo peasantry. In which the vital processes of production and circulation of capital as a whole have to operate, necessarily, materially. The historical conditions expressed in the struggles between the indigenous-cholo antimining struggles of Los Andes in direct contestation to the most advanced economic formations of imperialism world-economy, also evidence an advanced development of the class struggles.

The antimining struggles have effects on a world scale on the decrease in the rate of profit due to the obstruction of the time of circulation in the transformation of surplus-value into profit, in the monetary hoarding of gold by the banking trusts, in addition to disturbing the organic composition of the capital advanced by the mining circuit of reproduction. They have an antisystemic effect on the circuit of extended capital accumulation of the imperialist bourgeoisies by blocking the expansion of their extractive mining frontier, and obstructing the production and export of minerals. 

In this sense, the mining struggles challenge the circulation of the productive capital of the imperialist mining bourgeoisies. In the same way, by obstructing the production and circulation of mining commodities, the circuit of capital accumulation of the imperialist bourgeoisies cannot achieve the conversion of their productive capital into increased money-capital, that is, the transformation of surplus-value into profit. If mineral raw materials are not sold on the international market, the financial capital invested in mining cannot yield profits. 

The mining dependence of capitalist industries that effectively offers a rate of profit of the magnitude of interest for competing imperialist bourgeoisies, such as the war industry, the space industry and the computer and high-tech industries. It also suggests an analysis of the effects on a world scale of the mining struggles due to their consequences on the time of circulation and the organic composition of capital in the transformation of surplus value into profit. Determined by the natural, cultural and historical as is evidenced by the historical antisystemic resistance of the Andean indigenous-cholo peasantry. In which the vital processes of production and circulation of capital as a whole have to operate, necessarily, materially. 

As a whole, the reproduction of a certain capital implies the transformation of money-capital into productive-capital by an expected rate of profit equal to the ratio between the surplus-value already frozen in certain volume of commodity-capital produced by the exploitation of advanced unpaid concrete labour– ready for consumption on the market at a price fixed in indiscriminate upward rises since 1971; and the total capital advanced (Marx [1864-1865]2017: 49-55; Bukharin [1915]1966, 81-82).

\subsection{The indigenous-cholo peasantry struggles against imperialist mining as an antisystemic movement}

The location of this antisystemic historical resistance in Los Andes is indigenous in its broad base, structurally placed in subordination by the negative dialectics of race, which created the international division of labor by the material expansion of the competitive semi-colonial policy for mining exploitation, trade, and hoarding of merchant capitals in its attempted transition toward the formation of the oligarchic financial bourgeoisies which held the modern world-system under four successive Western inner-transitions since the XVI century.

The mining dependence of the capitalist industries which effectively offers a rate of profit of the magnitude of interest for the competing imperialist bourgeoisies, such as the war industry, space industry, and computational and high-technology industries.
Also suggest an analysis of the world-scale effects of antimining struggles because of its consequences on the circulation time, and capital organic composition in the transformation of surplus value into profit. Determined by the natural, cultural, and —as the antisystemic resistance of indigenous and cholo Andean peasantry evidence—: historical conditions, in which the vital processes of production and circulation of capital as a whole have to operate, materially.

As a whole, the reproduction of certain capital involves the transformation of money-capital in productive-capital for an expected rate of profit. Equal to the ratio between the surplus-value -produced by the exploitation of advanced unpaid concrete labor- already congealed in the shape of a certain volume of commodity-capital, ready for market consumption at a fixed price, and the total capital advanced (Marx 1864-1865[2017]:49-55; Bukharin 1916 [1966], 81-82).

Antimining struggles in Los Andes antagonize these reproduction processes and mechanisms vital for the modern world-system, and the imperialist world-economy. If Andean mining struggles decreases the imperialist mining bourgeoisies's rate of profit, it's antisystemic effects should have differentiated consequences on the multilevel polity contention among the imperialist bourgeoisies ruling the U.S. and the imperialist bourgeoisie ruling China for the expansion of its circuit of capital accumulation. At the current breakdown of the modern world-system shared imperialism of Sino-American finance capital, centralized during the '70s with differentiated accumulation regimes ruling their capital concentration until the 2000s when began its decentralization process.

The differentiated reproduction outcomes obtained by concrete finance capitalists from the rate of profit depend on the natural and cultural production conditions expressed in the organic and technical compositions of capital at each instance of the whole circuit of capital reproduction. The differentiation mechanism operating at the level of the rate of profit depends on the transformation of surplus-value into profit at a concrete time of circulation and expected proportions of variable and constant capital consumption given by the natural, cultural, and -as I argue here- by the historical conditions manifested in the Andean indigenous-cholo antimining struggles as historical challengers formed with the constitution of the modern world-system and the reproduction processes of the capitalist world-economy. And also, by the precedent repartition of that super-profit exploited in its components: interest, profit, and rent.

The antimining peasants’ struggles in the Andes of South America effectively obstruct the conversion of the money invested as mining productive capital by different imperialist bourgeoisies in competition for the extension of its reproduction circuit scale. Employing its militarized policy over the territories cursed by the abundance of mineral commodities under different forms of militarism, as military and paramilitary interventions in Latin America, or as new imperialist wars as initially expressed in Ukraine and Palestine (or sooner Taiwan) ongoing multilevel polity conflicts.

The processes of production and circulation of mining imperialist productive capital had been challenged by proletarian mining workers' struggles in China at the coal and lead mines of Anyuan, Pinghsiang County (Kiangsi Province) and Shuikoushan, Changning (Hunan Province) between 1922 and 1927; as well as in Peru in episodes of mining contention identified as the massacres of Malpaso (1930), Toquepala (1966), and Cobriza (1971). Nevertheless, the cooperation between the peasants' movement and the proletarian mining workers in China developed in the betrayed democratic revolution of 1927, and the further national resistance against Japanese and U.S. imperialism. 

In contrast, the extension of the peasants-workers revolutionary coalition is a matter of polemic between historians of the peasants' movement and mining worker's struggles in Peru. The development of the peasantry as a class for itself sparked at the final decades of the XX century, the indigenous rebellion in Ecuador of 1991 and the Chiapas liberation by the EZLN in 1994, which preceded the resistance against the expansion of the mining extractive frontier accelerated since the first years of the XXI century.

The antimining struggles of the Andean indigenous peasantry are historically grounded in the problem of land. The dispossession and destruction of vital values for the social reproduction of the peasantry and the rural proletariat as the soil and water, by the expansion of the mining extractive frontier is unreconcilable with the existence not only of the peasantry but for the reproduction of the rural proletariat surrounding the imperialist mining enclave. 

The territories cursed by the mining industry are objects of total biodiversity extermination due to the destruction of the conditions for life in general, and not only the cultural or natural conditions for peasant economies. 

The expansion of the imperialist policy over values as the natural sources for commodities production, transportation infrastructure, and gold hoarded, rather than sole money-capital is in dispute by imperialist military interventions and imperialist wars, by which certain monopolistic finance capital destroy the productive capital of the rival imperialists bourgeoisies, expanding in that manner its circuit of reproduction and restructuring the relations of production of the world economy and, therefore, the world-class structure from which that victorious imperialists bourgeoisies pursues alienation by its systemic-metabolic processes of capital production and circulation. Given the advanced development of its compulsive, and currently contradictory mechanisms of concentration and centralization of capital.

Although past mining contention waves of antisystemic resistance occurred during transitional stages of the capitalist modern world-system development -i.e. as the mining proletariat struggles developed in Peru and Great Britain during the first quarter of the 1900s-, the current restructuration attempt of the modern capitalist world-economy not only depend on a completed transition in the afterward of U.S. hegemony breakdown. 

Due to the advanced symptoms of the overaccumulation crisis and its attempted resolution, first through the liberalization of the gold price out of the financial institutions of Bretton Woods in 1971 (Fig. 1), and then through the extension of the mining extractive frontier particularly of gold production motivated by the demand of monetary gold holdings for national reserve’s banks exponentially since 2001; the tendency to accumulate monetary gold in national reserves that was strongly monopolistic under U.S. financial capital until the beginning of the new millennia began to be followed not only by the European central banks but also by Russia, India, and specifically China. 

The last mentioned state capitalist trust increased its acquisition of gold for its national reserves, as its superiority in monetary holdings compared to the U.S. (Fig. 2) required a balance in proportion to its monetary-gold holdings (Fig.3) to overcome the U.S. dollar as hegemonic currency, and intensified its capital production by gold mining in national contexts under which the situation of Sino-American shared imperialism remains, as in Latin America.

The formation of the bases for the Sino-American finance capital's centralization developed gradually, triggered by the Sino-Soviet secession and the resolution of the Vietnam imperialist war, until the first years of the XXI century. By the 11S attacks on Wall Street, the Pentagon, and the White House.

When, under conditions of shared imperialism, these finance capitals appeared to strengthen a process of decentralization opposite to the operation of its finance capitals across the borders of China and U.S. "nationalization" as industrial capital sharing in that manner the accumulation conditions for its consensed competition. The decentralization of the Sino-American finance capitals has differentiated effects for the circuit of accumulation of each imperialist bourgeoisies depending on its particular current levels of concentration and centralization. 

Also, the world-scale effects of the advanced decentralization of the Sino-American finance capitals exhibit differentiated consequences over the processes of production and circulation, shaping its transitional formation into the next international division of labor; hegemonic imperialist state; identities, tactics and strategies of class struggle; and future but soon present geo-economical territoriality of the capitalist world-economy configured by the results of the multilevel polity contention of imperialist competition involving imperialist wars (Ukraine, Palestine, and soon Taiwan) and imperialist militarism interventions as are developing in Latin America. 

Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru, Chile, Venezuela, Argentina, and Brazil's political regimes were destabilized by several attempts to stop the development of the populist and left electoral tide, by the typical preparation of coups d'etat transparently certified by the official U.S. imperialists bourgeoisies's bureaucracy official located in each of those countries minus Venezuela: the U.S. Ambassadors.

The total reserves of China in 2021 (3,43 trillion US dollars) are 4.79 times the volume of total reserves of the U.S. for the same year (716,15 billion US dollars) (Fig.1). However, the U.S. total gold reserves for the same last year 2021 was of 475,95 billion, and China’s total gold reserves only ascend to 114,01 billion (0,114 trillion) (Fig.2).

A long twentieth century of imperialism over gold mining countries holds a current U.S. high advantage in monetary gold holdings, which implies a non-actually completed transition to China as a new hegemonic state of global capitalism. mining and mining struggles against U.S. gold mining and China copper mining in Peru evidenced a complex dynamic of imperialist mining from which approaches of U.S. hegemonic crisis and the initiation of a fifth systemic cycle of accumulation with “Chinese characteristics” can be problematized beyond.

In the current critical juncture of capitalism's systemic chaos (Arrighi and Silver 1999), mining struggles in the Andes and Latin America take an anti-imperialistic and antisystemic role. To initiate a fifth systemic cycle of accumulation, the transnational capitalist class requires investing the enormous magnitude of money-capital already accumulated in the branches of industry where larger profits can be obtained.  Until new industries or future technological innovations could offer larger profits to the TCC, their productive capital will be located intensively in the branches of industry they know can provide larger profit returns, as mining. A new material expansion phase is a necessary condition for another cycle of financial expansion, but this time the extended accumulation circuit mechanism could be reaching its natural limits. Not only climate change but also historical change constrains and obstructs capitalism reconstitution at the present.

Until the beginning of the Twenty First century, the rising tide of environmental struggles carried out by peasant mobilization against the imperialist mining bourgeoisie takes particular relevance to the development of class struggle in general. As an industry of larger profits, mining is monopolized by the TCC across colonial and imperialist mining periods, making mining a post-colonial element of the political economy of Andean societies. Mining is a feature of the indigenous peasantry class foundation that goes beyond coloniality and imperialism, which with other elements of indigenous and cholo political syncretism flow in conjunction with new historical processes of class struggle, technological innovation and interstate competition for mobile capital.

Mining industry, taken as a large-profitable investment for capital accumulation by imperialist bourgeoisies, exhibits clearly the other side of extended reproduction, the militarized dimension of capital accumulation actualizes today in the repression of indigenous peasants mining struggles. In this sense, mining struggles require study as a priority field of contention for class struggle development in the Andean region, considering their position in the mines of the capital accumulation circuit in a period in which financial capital requires another phase of material expansion. The realization of another cycle of capital accumulation -a more profitable one for capitalist reproduction- actually depends on their highly profitable industries to take a big breath by the circulation of money capital into productive capital (MCM'). 

Indeed, mining struggles grow as limits to capital accumulation and imperialist domination in the Andes, in Latin America and at a global scale. O'Connor (1984) tried to remind to other radical thinkers in the middle of the 80's, that Marxist theorists “left few clues regarding possible 'external barriers' to capitalist accumulation in the form of either 'limits to growth' determined by the availability of natural resources or [...] limits to accumulation determined by cultural-ideological conditions of economic and social reproduction” (O´Connor 1984:6). Environmental socialist struggles, as he would also state, are a central field of contention "to combat the attempt by capital and the state to ideologically construct and politically use the current crisis to restructure economic, political, and social life with the sole purpose of renewed capitalist accumulation, including a new 'long wave' of ideological innovation” (O'Connor 1984:23). Nevertheless, the material challenge that environmental socialist struggles display over militarized accumulation, as in antimining struggles in the Andes, show a further development of the ideological struggles mentioned by James O'Connor.

\section{Antimining struggles blocking the expansion of the U.S. gold mining extractive frontier in Cajamarca}

The expansion of the extractive frontier of Minera Yanacocha-Newmont in Cajamarca has been contested by an mining movement that employs what is called a unique front strategy. It has proven to be effective in creating sufficient people’s social power to confront imperialist mining. The harshness of the military’s repression against the popular and mainly peasant mining movement in Cajamarca revealed the cruelty of the imperialist domination in Peru, just after the democratic election of a president of nationalist and military background (Ollanta Humala).  The mining struggles in Cajamarca taught us that peasant struggles can be interpreted and developed as anti-imperialist struggles, since they imply a class confrontation between two extremes of capitalist accumulation: the international mining bourgeoisie and the indigenous peasantry. The challenge that mining struggles represent for the central nucleus of imperialist domination in countries where mining constitutes the main enclave of capitalist accumulation, points to the strategic nature of the mining struggles. They are the spearhead for the development of an antisystemic movement, as well as critical for the geo-economics needs of the dynamics of capital accumulation during the current systemic crisis (Veltmeyer 2015:124; Wallerstein 2002:38).

The mining struggles for the defense of Quilish Mountain and the water sources of Cajamarca in 2004 had shown the effectiveness of the unique front strategy: they have joined the efforts of multiple organizations. These include: peasant nightwatch organizations (“rondas campesinas”), irrigation boards (“juntas de riego”), urban nightwatch organizations (“rondas urbanas”), the teachers union at the provincial and district level (SUTEP-Cajamarca), fractions of the PCP-PR of Cajamarca, and university students and environmental NGOs such as Ecovida and Grufides.
Since the beginning of the struggle against the Conga mining project of Minera Yanacocha-Newmont in November 2011, the environmental defense fronts confronted the government of the recently elected president Ollanta Humala who had promised to the peasants that Cajamarca’s lagoons would not be destroyed nor would mining be allowed without popular consent.

In this context, the sustained mining campaign opposing Minera Yanacocha-Newmont's Conga project escalated, contesting not only to the U.S. gold mining company, but directly the administration and government of the former military captain and President Ollanta Humala. The formation of the environmental defense fronts at the beginning of the first decade of the 2000s in Cajamarca was the result of a political coalition between the environmental NGOs –particularly Ecovida–, the teachers provincial union (SUTEP Cajamarca) and the peasant nightwatch organizations then controlled by the PCP-PR, as an effective strategy to unite the popular forces in defense of Cajamarca's water sources. However, after some time this coalition lost control of the popular mining movement.

In this context, a new group of leaders, composed of radical professional politicians, garnered control of the movement, limiting the role of the PCP-PR and the environmental NGOs.
Thus, in September of 2010, Celendin's first declaration was made to create the Interprovincial Coordinator for the Defense of the Environment, which forged a new strong coalition for mining struggles including second-level organizations of five provinces located in the direct influence area of the Conga mining project (Interview LM2 03/06/2014). This coalition would allow coordination between the environmental NGOs, led by Marco Arana (GRUFIDES), and the radical fraction of the popular movement of Cajamarca led by Wilfredo Saavedra. As the latter was gaining strength among the peasant and urban bases of Cajamarca, bringing together fractions of the teacher’s union (SUTEP Cajamarca) and peasant and urban nightwatch organizations (“rondas campesinas y urbanas”) opposed to the control of the PCP-PR, the frictions between these sectors worsened.

With the formation of this new coalition, the sector of Wilfredo Saavedra would be in charge of learning and translating the environmental framework to a broader sector of the peasantry, university students and neighborhood organizations. This demonstrated the capacity of the radical sector leadership to further broaden the bases of the unique front against the expansion of the extractive frontier of Minera Yanacocha-Newmont. The radicalization of the struggle began on November 24, 2011, when the peasants of Bambamarca and Celendín took over the lagoons that the Conga Mining Project planned to destroy. This performance of struggle required an effective organizational structure that would allow the mobilization and rotation of 200 peasants every two days to prevent the machinery of Minera Yanacocha, the police and the military from entering the lagoons and taking control of water sources (Interview LM5 03/08/2014).

The magnitude of the repression carried out by the government of Ollanta Humala crudely demonstrates the operation of mining accumulation by repression against the peasantry of Cajamarca. The militarization of Cajamarca was order by decree RS 231-2012-DE, which imposed the state of emergency from May 29 to June 25, 2012 in the provinces of Cajamarca, Celendín and Hualgayoc.

In this context, on July 3, 2012, during the 34th day of the regional strike (“paro regional indefinido”) in Cajamarca, the military forces killed four peasants in the town’s square of Celendín:

“Here, on July 3, it happened that the police and the military were down on the corner [..] when they started shooting at us, then the people who were here in the central square [of Celendín] began to run through different places […]; and the people […] took shelter here in the church of the Virgen del Carmen. And when the police and the military came […] wanting to break it down [the door] […]. The priests were inside […], the door of the church was open to shelter us because if it hadn't been open suddenly more of us would have been killed; but thank God the door was open, and we entered, more or less 200 people. We were sheltered inside from around 4[pm]in the afternoon until 8:30 at night, until the priest asked the Ombudsman of the Peruvian state to come and get us out: because we couldn't go out because the military and the police were full [at] [the courtyard of the church]. […] And then they thought that we had thrown stones at each other, we had killed each other with stones [referring to the fallacious and blatant lies of the then Minister of the Interior, who had “informed” that the [four] dead in Celendín were a result of stones thrown by the protesters themselves]. But it wasn't true because my son had the bullet that had entered his mouth. The first helicopter that came, then […] since he was filming the helicopter, like this [raises an arm and makes the gesture of holding a video camera or cell phone pointed at the sky] […] the bullet had entered through his mouth and had stayed […] in the brain. So that was what they had taken out [in the autopsy] because the little teeth here and the bones there [touches his mouth] had been found in his stomach” (SERVINDI 2014).

The mobilized groups in Celendín marched to the Municipality’s building to demand the town Mayor Mauro Silas to stay on the people’s side in their struggle to defend the lagoons.  The shots made by the military from the balcony of the municipal building and from helicopters, exhibited the magnitude of the imperialist mining repression. The brutality of the military’s repression of the popular mining movement in Cajamarca revealed the imperialist nature of the domination exercised by the international mining bourgeoisie.

\section{Obstructing China’s copper mining under imperialist U.S. domination in Apurímac}

The cruelty of the imperialist repression against the mining workers during the 20th century reveals the magnitude of the repression of the mining struggle carried out by the peasantry today, after a century of political mining contention in Peru. The social formation that currently directly confronts extractive mining capital is the peasantry, not the mining proletariat. By claiming the defense of water, land and life against the extension of the extractive frontier, mining struggles show themselves to be absolutely antagonistic to the extractive capitalist accumulation process. That is, as a frontal struggle against the international mining bourgeoisie, and even beyond, the mining struggle confronts the capitalist system and the productive and commercial dynamics that sustain it on a global scale, blocking its reproduction. Faced with this problem, imperialist domination mobilized the armed military forces to enforce  the interests of the mining bourgeoisie (Lust 2016:5).

On Friday, October 14, 2016, two hundred indigenous peasants from the communities of Choquecca, Quehuira, Allahua, Antuyo and Pumamarca, located in the province of Cotabambas (Apurímac), began a road blockade obstructing the trucks loaded with mineral ore through the mining road used by the Chinese capital company MMG Limited Las Bambas. The peasant communities demanded payment from the mining company for the use of a communal road within their territories, through which the mine site connects to the main mining road and the trucks loaded with mineral ore head to the port of Matarani in the region of Arequipa. The road blockade that started that morning was brutally cleared by the police, killing community member Quintino Cereceda Huiza with a bullet to the head and wounding twenty more peasants. A few days later, the Minister of the Interior (security) Carlos Basombrío, declared that the police forces were not authorized in any way to clear the road blockade that day (El Comercio 2016:8).

The communities of southern Cotabambas rebelled against the power of the Chinese mining company MMG Limited Las Bambas for 186 days until April 17, 2017, when the province of Cotabambas was assigned the state of emergency, authorizing military repression against community members. Although the mining struggle of the peasant communities of Cotabambas (Apurímac) against the Chinese mining company MMG Limited Las Bambas did not include an antimining claim -as in Cajamarca and Cotopaxi-, the magnitude of the repression executed to secure the interests of China’s mining bourgeoisie confirms that the TCC rules imperialist mining.

\section{Conclusions}
The article shows that mining struggles have an anti-system effect on the TCC's circuit of extended capital accumulation, and effectively challenge imperialist domination in Peru. By blocking the expansion of mining’s territorial frontier and obstructing the production and circulation of mining commodities, mining struggles challenge the mining bourgeoisie and the circulation of its productive capital.

The effectiveness of obstructive mining performances in Peru was revealed at least since 2004, with the success of the mining protests against Minera Yanacocha-Newmont and the withdrawal of government authorization to explore the Quilish mountain in Cajamarca. The increasingly radical nature of the contentious performances by the peasants of Huambocancha Alta and Huambocancha Baja achieved an uninterrupted blockade of the access route to Minera Yanacocha-Newmont gold mine, and stalled the police forces sent to unblock it. Although  it wasn’t the first time that highway was blocked during episodes of mining contention in Cajamarca, it is worth saying that such the blockade leads to the gradual stoppage of the mine’s gold mining activities, significantly affecting its production and profits (Mejía 2021:97).

Ross (2003:54, 62) points out that minerals are a type of natural resource whose transport is relatively  easy to obstruct, which has implications for the duration and intensity of extractive conflicts. The blockade implied not only the impossibility of access and exit to the mine’s facilities, but also the expensive use of helicopters for the supply of fuel, equipment, labor and other supplies (Pérez Mundaca 2012:70-71). Thus, the obstructive performance  blocking  the Cajamarca-Bambamarca highway ended up drowning Minera Yanacocha-Newmont, proving to be an effective performance of struggle for almost the entire duration of the mining campaign for the defense of Quilish mountain (Mejía 2021:98-99).

Innovative obstructive performances shared in Apurímac and Cajamarca highlight how imperialist mining operates in the Andes. The companies of the international mining bourgeoisies need to establish the flow of the extracted mineral either to a smelting plant -such as the Southern Peru Copper Corporation has in Moquegua-, or directly to the port of Matarani in Arequipa. As suggested by Ye et al. (2020:7), mining multinational corporations claim the monopolized control of the territory and its resources, but also of the entry and exit points from which mineral commodities are transported to a port for exportation, finally traded for export, where it completes its conversion into money-capital. 

In this sense, mining and mining struggles in the Andes effectively block the expansion of the extractive mining frontier and obstruct the circuit of the imperialist bourgeoisies finance capital invested in mining. The indigenous peasantry is actually at the forefront of antisystemic movements challenging the reproduction of global capitalism to defend their water, their lands, and their “collective self” from imperialist mining.

\section{References}

\section{Figures}


\end{document}