The antimining movement is currently at the front of the struggle for environmental justice in Los Andes and in Latin America. The militarism with which the expansion of the mining extractive frontier advancement is evidenced in the assassination of indigenous and cholo peasants by paramilitary squads linked to the domestic narco-bourgeoisies, and by the army and police militarized repression. These assassinations of peasants occurred during the execution of campaigns of struggle against the dispossession and destruction of land and water by mining production, when the organized indigenous and cholo peasantry contests the bullets and war grenades of state armies with self-crafted and improvised shields, slingshots, and their heads, eyes, legs, arms and chests. In the afterwards of the antimining campaigns of struggle the criminalization of peasants leaders, environmental activists, young and old indigenous and cholo woman and man judicialized by the mining corporations accused of eco-”terrorism” for defending the lagoons, paramos, mountains, and the total biodiversity -reduced to the ontological objects conceptualized as land and water-, as vital sources for the social reproduction not only of the peasantry, but for the rural proletariat of the nearest towns and cities, and for the future of human and non-human life.
The project proposed will develop fieldwork during the development of the antimining campaigns at Ecuador, Colombia, Perú, and Chile, from a research-activist approach. The collaboration with the indigenous-cholo peasantry organizations which constitute the antimining movement in Los Andes, will produce artistic, multimedia, and scholar contents oriented to impact on the conditions in which the anti-capitalist and environmental justice indigenous-cholo peasantry struggles against mining dispossession and destruction of water and land in Los Andes and Latin America. 


description

My research-activist interests are focused on the antisystemic effects of the antimining struggles. I’m approaching the militarism with which the antimining movements are being repressed as a feature of the breakout of the U.S. interstate hegemony, in which the securitization foreign policy over Los Andes is being executed by militarization since  2019 when the authoritarian neoliberal reversion process of regimes de-democratization started in Latin America after almost 20 years of neoliberal-democratization romance, at the intercourse of the Ukraine-Russia and the Palestine-Israel-U.S. imperialists wars of repartition. For the analysis of the historical juncture in which the antimining movement in Los Andes is embedded, I’m building a bridge from the historical political sociology to a Marxist critique of the political economy of imperialism.

The connection between the antimining struggles and radical environmental justice social movement’s claims is explicit as the indigenous-cholo peasantry stopping with their chests and improvised shields the destruction of land, water, and biodiversity. Contesting effectively but in complete asymmetry of political resources the expansion of the extractive frontier, which is advancing through the highlands toward the Amazonian Forest, considered the Lung of Humanity.

