A public art installation, a digital exhibition or mapping project, a historic house or a city tour, a commemorative project devoted to histories of violence and struggle, a curatorial project that generates new knowledge from an archive of old family photographs—Public Humanities is in the doing. Most of us who have entered Public Humanities from the university side of things—whether faculty or students—have discovered along the way that this is a project whose chief ambitions and whose greatest achievements may be in the realm of form rather than content. We may have each thought at one time that Public Humanities would prove an interesting and expansive vehicle for our intellectual work, that is, but we have learned by the doing that we are not merely disseminating scho larship (as if Public Humanities were merely publication by other means), but evoking a “public” and laying an infrastructure of relationships that is itself a creation of some moment. Public Humanities, properly conducted, is a verb, not a noun. My own engagement in Public Humanities began as a fluke, continued as a lark, and has ended as the most important gift of my career. What became the Public Humanities program at Yale first bubbled up in the form of student agi tation for community engagement and for instruction and technical skills in public intellectual work. This was 2008. The two leaders of this movement, Monica Martinez and Ryan Brasseaux, have gone on to make significant marks in their own right (indeed Martinez, now a professor at Brown, is represented in this volume); but at the time they were both graduate students, and as chair of American Studies it was my good fortune that their terrific ideas were all landing on my desk. We embarked on an inventory of existing resources at Yale, and quickly discovered riches that had gone mostly unnoticed in any systematic way—faculty across the disciplines who had vast experience in Public History, in ioo Mattnew trye jacooson exhibition design, in Public Art and archivally-based performance, in filmmaking and other documentary work, in radio, in Digital Humanities, in creative non fiction, and other forms of “public” writing. We also discovered that the many educators and curators affiliated with the university’s collections, museums, and libraries were already conducting tutorials in what could only be called Public Humanities, if a student were savvy enough to find them. The resources were all there, in other words, and we could begin building a record of Public Huma nities achievement before we even had to ask the administration for a dime—a strangely important tactic at our wealthy but Puritan institution. My colleague Laura Wexler and I appointed ourselves to the role of acting co-directors (meaning: we acted like we were the co-directors, and we still do), and we went to work. As Michael Denning once said, the things most worth doing at a uni versity usually feel like some kind of conspiracy. The first phase of this stealth program-building consisted of identifying and convening potential stake-holders among faculty, staff, and students, and creating a modest curriculum toward what at most universities would be called a certifi cate program—not a freestanding degree, but a credential available to students along the way toward their Ph.D. We settled on four requirements that would loosely chart a path for students, but would be open enough to accommodate a wide range of pursuits, documentary filmmaking right alongside museum exhi bition or public history. The four requirements included: 1. An Introduction to Public Humanities seminar that is offered each fall. This course theorizes both “publics” and “humanities,” and includes introductory readings in museum studies, documentary studies, digital humanities, public and community history, and other dialogic practices in collective knowledge production. The course culminates in a group project each December—a leap of blind faith from one year to the next, but has come to include a truly astonishing array of student accomplishments, including public exhibits devoted to the history of the New Haven waterfront and to the city’s music and performance history; a digital project devoted to the local food truck industry and the immigration history that produced it; a three-panel film on the Black Panther trial in New Haven in 1970; a curated public dinner at the New Haven Museum, presenting a global history of local chefs and their cuisines. 2. A “methods” course in one of the skill-based pillars of Public Humanities, such as exhibition design, documentary filmmaking or photography, oral history, pod-casting, or digital humanities. 3. An internship or practicum with a partnering local or regional institution, or with a contiguous unit on campus such as the university’s art gallery. 4. A capstone project that may take the form of a traditional academic paper, but is more often an installation or exhibit, a website, a film, a broadcast, a walking tour, an interactive map, or a digital archive. Afterword 167 The establishment of these four requirements in phase one of our collective work led immediately to the more ambitious phase two: the development of our rolodex, as it were, both internally to the university in order to maximize our offerings, and externally across the region, including contacts at historical societies, museums, libraries, documentary production companies, galleries, TV and radio stations, and anywhere else a student might pursue an intern ship placement. In the years since these initial curricular discussions took place, Public Humanities at Yale has crystalized around six broad areas or modes of research and presentation: Museums & Collections; Documentary Studies; Digital Humanities; History & the Public; Space & Place; and Arts Research. Each area represents one of the nodes of faculty and staff strength we discovered in our inventory; each is also tied to institutional partnerships we have forged over the years. Its chameleon-like quality is one reason that Public Humanities takes such different forms from one institution to the next—centering museum studies at one college, digital humanities or public history at the next—as the enterprise adapts to the particularities of a given institutional and local setting. But this is also one of the great strengths of the field, keeping it both nimble but ever on-point. This inventorying of resources and forging of relationships, as noted at the outset, turned out to be the real “doing” of Public Humanities at Yale—not delivering the content of our scholarship in new forms, nor simply delivering the academy to the “public.” But evoking new publics and giving both form and venue to new kinds of collectivity and conversation, and in doing so, delivering the vast knowledge that lives outside of disciplines—knowledge possessed by artists and activists, immigrants’ rights workers, community organizers, journal ists and filmmakers, poets, musicians, union organizers—into the university. One is quickly humbled; better yet, one quickly sheds the arrogance of the institu tion. The “doing” of Public Humanities turned out not to be primarily a matter of credentialing students or of disseminating the university’s intellectual pro duct, but a matter of creating something wholly new in the social fabric that supports such intellectual work in the first place. We have passed on some skills to our students, to be sure, and many of us likewise took an interesting turn in our own scholarly work—in my own case, a turn away from the monograph and into documentary photography and filmmaking. But what the “doing” of Public Humanities has really meant, to take a case, is that on two Tuesdays every month, you can go to one of the branches of the New Haven Free Public Library for a public lecture and a lively, engaged, committed, multi-racial, multi-vocal, multi-generational discussion of “Democracy in Crisis,” the kind of collectivity and exchange that barely exists in the United States any more. More than the content of any one of these discussions—on neoliberalism, on criminal justice and policing, on immigration, on white nationalism, on envir onmental justice—this space of commitment and exchange is itself an exemplar of Public Humanities’ achievement. ioo Mattnew i-rye Jacobson Somewhere along the way our administration began to like us—not necessarily for the right reasons; rather more as a PR investment on Yale’s behalf, but never mind—and we garnered a modest budget for programming, projects, and student support. More importantly, the collectivity of this work (appreciated for the right reasons) became a central feature of the culture among the cluster of contiguous and participating units in the humanities. Once you begin the work of cracking silos, it turns out, cracking silos becomes a way of life. In 2014 this spirit of collectivity prompted a series of discussions with likeminded scholars across the region, each representing one of a motley, asymmetrical, but fellow-travehng collection of departments and programs stretching from Boston in the North to Newark in the South. The result was the establishment in 2015 of the North Eastern Public Humanities Consortium (NEPH), whose members include programs devoted to Museum Studies and Material Culture at the Bard Graduate Center; Public Huma nities at Brown; the Center for Oral History Research at Columbia; the Futures Initiative at CUNY Grad Center; the Cultural Agents Initiative and the History Design Studio at Harvard; American Studies and the South Side Initiative at Lehigh; the Clement Price Center for Ethnicity, Culture, and the Modem Experience at Rutgers, Newark; Public Humanities at Tufts; Public History at the University of Massachusetts, Boston; and Public Humanities at Yale. This group, now including faculty and students from each institution, convenes annually for three days in April at one of the sites for a series of plenary discussions, student presentations, topical breakout sessions on major issues in Public Humanities, and walking tours, gallery visits, museum tours, and other activities that highlight the distinctive nature and achievements of the hosting institution. This regional affiliation has generated a great deal of important discussion and mutual support, fostering a generative and enlivening cross-traffic from one institution to the next in the form of teaching collaborations, visiting speaker ships, workshops, and the like. One goal of NEPH has always been to augment each institution’s resources by drawing upon the others, taking full advantage of our asymmetries. This has worked. But one of the most important things to arise out of this ongoing discussion across several years now has been our group authorship of a Public Humanities “white paper” (sometimes referred to as a “manifesto,” which fits), a philosophical document that lays out the raison d’etre of Public Humanities, articulates our commitments, and names the field’s more general significance for higher education in a neoliberal age. The entire NEPH White Paper is printed below