10 minutes presentation (including Q&A)

**What do sociologists mean when they talk about "social structure"? Provide examples.**

Theoretical approaches of social structure, "structural approaches, treat the identities and interests of actors as defined by positions within social structures and view choices and actions as results of these positions" (Mahoney and Snyder 1999, 5).

A relational ontology recognize a social reality of transactional relations in which every identity or substance, is an incessant changing outcome of the dynamic of transactions which the entities in relation cross through not without being changed (Emirbayer 1997).

Some relations have more transactional power than others to generate the conditions over which human agency develops. In this sense, for example, relations as dispossession, private property, land ownership, slavery, waged labor, define the main structural cleavages: social classes. The power of this relations operates in the constraining of humans to live in certain determined manner and position. The power of relations as private property over land and means of production, for example, denoted the re-creation of the material conditions by which a great majority of humans don't have any other manner to produce their means of life and social reproduction except by becoming waged labor in the capitalist process of production.

The fatality of social structures operates in creating a non-alternative choice for social reproduction for the great majority than waged labor in capitalist production, in that manner, producing their own conditions of exploitation and domination by selling his life for social reproduction and at the same time producing the capitalists profits of which a portion will be reinvested as capital in the maintenance of those relations with the power to generate that magnitude of constraints: private property over the means of production and land, and private authority over the state as a sine qua non condition for the persistence of the first two relations.

Social structure is a theoretical category rather than an operational concept for sociology and social sciences. It denotes the constraining power of the accumulated and combined effects produced by durable and past processes of social reality, which is a reality configured by the events of transactional relations. 

"Strictly speaking, we observe transactions, not relations. Transactions between social sites transfer energy from one to another, however microscopically. From a series of transactions we infer a relation between the sites: a friendship, a rivalry, an alliance, or something else. (Without being too rigid about it, in general, I will call those connections “ties” when referring to their durable characteristics, and “relations” when talking about their dynamic interactions.) Cumulatively, such transactions create memories, shared understandings, recognizable routines, and alterations in the sites themselves. In the pages that follow, I will sometimes speak of transactional perspectives but of relational mechanisms. Most of the time, however, I will save words by lumping the two together as “relational.”" (Tilly 2005, 7).

An historical approach to social structure, or more accurately, to the structure/agency problem in social theory, would insist in the recognition of the timing in which the constraining power of social structures diminish, opening a range of maneuver for social and historical change in which contingency effectively shifts the material conditions of future transactions. Critical junctures appear as situations in which the structural constrains over human agency are relaxed or diminished in its effectivity, creating the opportunity for divergent historial developments.

An example of the property of contingency hold by a relational perspective of social structure will emphasize the unexpected events which change drastically the previous structure of relations and its future trajectories, as revolutions or revolts.
A revolutionary attempt could result in a socialist revolution if the took over of the state concretizes, or can be a revolt in which this task wasn't completed. The develop of one or the other result, a revolution or a revolt is contingent and hardly anticipated, unexpected, and in that manner is disruptive of the social order and of the intentions, interpretations and actions of the capitalist class.  