*Devil lives in the details.*
In Chapter 2 of Capital Vol 1., Marx was tracing the determinants of the exchange process, particular for bourgeois society, in its initial conditions. Which begins with the social movement of commodities, by one side, and money in the other extreme of exchange relations.
The first distinction presented by Marx as a determinant of the exchange process of the bourgeoisie society is the differentiation between the commodity and the bearer. For the [bearer] his commodity possesses no direct use-value %%[[KV1C2P179L13]]%%. For himself, it is only use-value as mean of exchange %%[[KV1C2P179L15]]%%.
The second, is the determination of a universal equivalent as a consequence of the expansion of the exchange process. From the perspective of the individual, each of the bearers treats his own commodity in exchange as the universal equivalent for all other commodities.
The third one corresponds to the transformation of gold, the money-commodity, into monetarized capital. In the transition between the exchange of use-values, and the exchange of commodities, there is a determinant detail. And more than a detail, the particularity of the exchange process, an original mistake, a social accident, acted first then thought, to treat something, that is not for being appropriated as a commodity, as if it was a commodity.
The historical expansion and intension of the process of exchange is also the process of taking everything that is possible to be treated as something to being appropriated %%(LCWV38P108L17)%%, as if it was a commodity, With the purpose of appearing as its owner, seeking to receive an equivalent exchange-value in the money-form of exchange-value. That movement, the mechanical and unreflective, unethical application of the logic of dialectics, the power of alienation, therefore appropriation of something not being for appropriation, and the later sublimated freedom of money from gold as its elementary form of value. Ideally placed exchange value and value somewhere outside the elementary form of everything with price. 
The determinants of the exchange process are rooted in the history of the formal social movement of the commodities, because the exchange of use-values in upward scale-shift, requires a relative form of value reached by social accident by one commodity which is both commodity and money: gold, and also other precious metals in history, became universal equivalents %%[[KV1C2P180L24]]%%. Fixing its use as a means of exchange, appearing in the process of exchange as a sign of magnitude for the quantitative equivalence of the exchange-value form of all the commodities, as the universal equivalent commodity under certain scale of circulation.
With the escalation of its compulsive subsumption by circulation over the exchange process, money is used (first in theory, and then in real) as a determinant of the “need to give an external expression to this opposition [between use-value and value which is latent in the nature of the commodity] for the purposes of commercial intercourse”. The upward scale shift of the exchange process mediated by money produced the drive toward the invention of an “independent” form of value, which finds neither rest nor peace until it became “independent from its own use-value” %%[[KV1C2P182L34]]%% completed the differentiation of all commodities into commodities and money. 
Therefore, the value of everything is distinguished from its usefulness for exchange, and signed with price %%[[KV1C2P187L9]]%%, by an imagined quantity of monetized capital valorized as an ideally equivalent quantity of expended human labour.
Why the indigenous alienable wealth became gold and silver, and aren’t anymore nor cattle neither slaves? Is because gold and not the slave was already the social form of money when the “discovery” of silver and gold mines of America occurred.
After genocide and slavery, in the exchange process, the mercantile capitalist as bearer of that commodity-money purposely treats something as the “chief element of indigenous alienable wealth” %%[[KV1C2P183L18]]%%. As if it doesn’t have use-value outside its exchange-value form. They treated gold as pure money, and not as commodity-money. Not all the mercantile capitalists could understand at the same pace the value of labour for the circulation process, this means, the valorization process of exchange-values.
But certain industrial capital was in formation, incorporating the value of labour into the valorization process of gold as a commodity in its circulation toward its money-form of value. Besides its circulation as a means of payment, gold is then produced for hoarding. At the same time, gold mining was already a branch of production centralized in the hand of capitalist production, before, during, and after the transition of mercantile capital into industrial and finance capital. 
So, the social accident of the expanded circulation of gold-money as capital and mainly the decision to use it as a means for exchange, as a universal equivalent, was not an accident for the individual gold bearer producing and hoarding the money-commodity of gold. That one, then, later, became the bearer of finance capital. Who as hoarder of the money-commodity wants to exchange every other commodity as metallized-money, monetized money, monetarized money or crypto-money, avoiding the alienation of his money-gold in the process of circulation as a means of payment %%[[KV1C3P231L8]]%%.
“The difficulty lies not in comprehending that money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why and by what means a commodity becomes money.” %%[[KV1C2P186L24]]%%

*"all the things are consumed by fire, and fire by all things, just as gold does for goods and goods for gold" (Herakleitos, Plutarch, Moralia, "The E at Delphi, 388D").*

Chapter 3 of Capital explains the social functions executed by money in the circulation process. Marx distinguished money, first, as a measure of value, as the social incarnation of labour expressed in price or money-form. Money as form of appearence of the common measure of value: labour-time, depended on the circulation of gold as universal equivalent commodity. %%[[KV1C3P188L10]]%% 
Price is the money form of the magnitude of value measured by an imaginary quantity of gold ideally equivalent to the labour time socially necessary to produce the correspondent quantity of standard units of price %%[[KV1C3P195L20]][[KV1C3P196L24]]%%. When the standard of price is defined by a fixed weight of gold %%[[KV1C3P191L4]][[KV1C3P194L13]]%%P. Indeed, as measure of value, money serves only in an ideal capacity, as an imaginary quantity of gold equivalent to the abstractly neccessary labour-time which is, in first instance, the common measure of value %%[[KV1C3P192L5]]%%. Then gold became the standard of price with the separation of the money-form from gold in the circulation of money, but not in the circulation of gold as a money-commodity. 
This separation of the money-form from the commodity-form of value, developed later in the liberalization of the money price from its elementary form as gold %%[[KV1C3P189L1]]%%. Extending the dissassociation between socially neccessary labour time, as the common measure of value of commodities, and the money-form of value. Then separated from the price of gold and only lightly linked to an imaginary quantity of gold %%[[KV1C3P197L1]]%% fixed as aliquote part %%[[KV1C3P193L1]]%% of the actual measure of the standard of price: the U.S. Dollar as its self unit of measurement, after 1971 international financial reforms.
Marx explained his concern relative to the quantitative incongruity and qualitative contradiction between magnitude of value and price%%[[KV1C3P197L1]]%%, As inherent to the introduction of the price-form %%[[KV1C3P196L24]]%%.
"Hence the less the unit  of measurement (here a quantity of gold) is subject to variation, the better the standard of price fulfils its office. But gold can serve as a measure of value only because it is itself a product of labour, and therefore potentially variable in-value" %%[[KV1C3P192L20]]%%. %%2626:101 p 191, [[KV1C3P192L20]]en Karl Marx - Capital, Volume 1
https://go.atlasti.com/b0853060-83cf-45ff-8c33-f41b894b4007/documents/6bf9416f-b560-46d7-845c-8071da674a66/quotations/c63e0a72-52aa-4ac6-ac4b-a94d8fe58845%%
Gold is still nowadays a fixed measure of the price-form, the exponential upward in its price is non-related with its value variation in its production process or variable composition of capital -as Marx will specify later. As the productivity of labour in mining reduced the variability of the amount of labour embodied in gold production its variation becames reduced, diluting its function of gold as a measure of value, in comparison to the U.S. Dollar as the money-form or price. Nevertheless, gold diminish its variation as unit of measurement as a fixed aliquote part of the standard of price, but that stability is contradicted by the volatility of the U.S. Dollar and of the U.S. Dollar price of gold reserves.
The function of money as means for circulation resulted from the inherent contradiction between the elementary form of use value and its exchange-value, resolved by the creation of a new form of value which is the money-form  (M) of exchange-value, mediating the exchange of commodities (C-C) %%[[KV1C3P198L16]]%%. The final instance of the exchange of commodities mediated by money, allows the consumption of a use-value, only after its purchase (C-M-C). Introducing the commodities in a circulation process %%[[KV1C3P198L29]]%%.
The metamorphosis of commodities is a double process expressing, first the inherent contradiction in the commodity form, between use-value and exchange-value. And an external contradiction between the commodities and money, expressing the use-value that are commodities while representing its exchange-value in price, while the money-commodity gold appears as the materialization of value %%[[KV1C3P199L16]]%%. Neverthless, gold is not money, is the money-commodity. All the other commodities relates with gold as the mean to express its money-form of value, in price %%[[KV1C3P199L10]]%%. Price is the money-name of an assumed quantity of socially neccesary labour objectified in it, as exchange-value of the total of real embodiments of its utility measured by an imaginary quantity of gold represented in the money-form which becomes, price. %%[[KV1C3P202L1]]%%
"But what is the commodity exchanged for? For the universal shape assumed by its own value. And what is the gold exchanged for? For a particular form of its own use-value". %%[[KV1C3P203L17]]%% 
The particular use-value form of gold, which Marx is referring to above, is the standard of price. Which is a fixed weight of gold (i.e. an ounce of gold) operating as the unit of expression shared by their comparable magnitudes of price.%%[[KV1C3P192L5]]%%
Therefore in "[t]he process of circulation, therefore, unlike the direct exchange of products, does not disappear from view once the use-values have changed places and changed hands. **The money does not vanish when it finally drops out of the series of metamorphoses undergone by a commodity**. It always leaves behind a precipitate at a point in the arena of circulation vacated by the commodities. Circulation [of commodities] sweats money from every pore". %%[[KV1C3P208L4]]%%
The circulation of money, on the other hands, is determined by the circulation of commmodities, the circuit C-M-C always implicate the constant removal of money (M) from the commodity-owner in its first metamorphosis (C-M) to the other commodity-owner (M-C). By this second metamorphosis money becames a means of purchase, always in the hands of the buyer, so the commodity is transfered from the hands of the seller to the buyer's one, while removes the money from the hands of the buyer puting it in the sellers' one. %%[[KV1C3P210L18]][[KV1C3P210L26]][[KV1C3P211L10]][[KV1C3P213L1]]%%
"With this, the continuity of the movement depends entirely on the  money, and the same movement which, for the commodity, in­cludes two opposed processes, is, when considered as the movement of the money, always one and the same process, a constant  change of places with commodities which are always different" %%[[KV1C3P211L21]]%%.
%% 2626:167 p 210, KV1C3P211L21 en Karl Marx - Capital, Volume 1
https://go.atlasti.com/b0853060-83cf-45ff-8c33-f41b894b4007/documents/6bf9416f-b560-46d7-845c-8071da674a66/quotations/bf299081-c9e5-400e-8d9a-b662ae00ae80 %%
The circuit of money is the expression of the circuit of commodities, so on Marx rised the question about how much money is being absorbed by the circulation of commodities? %%[[KV1C3P213L3]][[KV1C3P216L2]][[KV1C3P216L30]]%%, introducing in that manner circulation time as a determinant of the **ratio between** the velocity of the circulation of commodities and the velocity of circulation of money.
So, if the total quantity of money circulating, is determined by the total sum of prices of all commodities in circulation %%[[KV1C3P213L17]]%%, then, the circulation of the money-commodity (gold) is the expression of the total price of the commodities which exchange was mediated by money. As the quantity of total money absorbed as means for circulation is known by its equivalence to the total sum of the prices of all the commodities in circulation. We can also rise the following interrogants: How much gold is being absorbed by the circulation of money? As, its answer should be different from the response of the next one: How much gold is being expressed ideally by the sum of total prices of the commodities circulating? The total sum of the prices of the commodities in circulation blass the average of the velocity of circulation (measured as the number of times the same piece of money turns-over within a given period %%[[KV1C3P216L2]]%%), determine the price of the quantity of money or the price of the money-commodity which is gold as means of circulation.
Gold, indeed, is the medium of circulation and measure of value as the money-commodity, "either in its own body or through a representative, is money. Gold (or silver) is therefore money" %%[[KV1C3P225L28]]%%. It is because gold is a commodity, that has value, and can function as standard of price. So, only if paper money represents gold is a symbol of value. %%[[KV1C3P227L24]]%%

%% 2626:125 p 215, KV1C3P216L2 en Karl Marx - Capital, Volume 1
https://go.atlasti.com/b0853060-83cf-45ff-8c33-f41b894b4007/documents/6bf9416f-b560-46d7-845c-8071da674a66/quotations/d50102b2-fd72-446d-ac7f-2774116f1e92 %%

%% 2626:139 p 224, KV1C3P225L28 en Karl Marx - Capital, Volume 1
https://go.atlasti.com/b0853060-83cf-45ff-8c33-f41b894b4007/documents/6bf9416f-b560-46d7-845c-8071da674a66/quotations/6205f33a-6bf7-42e2-a5fd-29abaf7890c4

2626:79 p 226, KV1C3P227L4 en Karl Marx - Capital, Volume 1
https://go.atlasti.com/b0853060-83cf-45ff-8c33-f41b894b4007/documents/6bf9416f-b560-46d7-845c-8071da674a66/quotations/033c2ece-236f-42cc-aec2-e093031fb262 %%

Indeed, the rise in the productivity of labor in gold production changed the quantity of the standard of value measure of money that is being produced by an equivalent abstract quantity of labor, while the price of gold growth exponentially as it is hoarded in its money-commodity form of value by the international finance state capitalists in reserves funds.






As the circulation of the commodities and their transubstantiation into money are by their exchange scale, the chance of social accident by which the circuit M-C-M' is being obstructed, mediate between the necessary conversion of commodities into money, correspondent to the process of transformation of surplus-value into profit.
Is it not in the transition forms in which we should pay attention? 
What is to be done? Historically, the exchange process produced the accumulation of gold as a universal equivalent commodity which became money-commodity. At the same pace the production of gold reaches the circulation process, “gold […], in its crude state, becomes immediately, on its emergence from the bowels of the earth, the direct incarnation of all human labour” %%[[KV1C2P187L18]]%%. 
With the liberalization of gold price, since 1971, the total monetary system debased money from its elementary form. As if in that manner, the use-value of gold as the socially formed universally equivalent, would be suppressed, and replaced by certain specific currency (US Dollar), fixed by a hegemonic arrangement relying only on U.S. hegemony. 
The liberalization of the price of money from its standard of price expressed in a fixed weight of gold as the elementary value form of money-commodity, raised the price of gold exponentially as well as propel another gold rush.  But, as gold didn’t lose completely its properties, its physical properties as standard of price, central and international banks hoard it with extended voracity, while at the same time state capitalism is benefiting from the exponential upward of the gold-commodity price effecting in the exchange value of its national reserve gold fund.
Is the total sum of the different prices of the money-commodity circulating as world money expressing “the direct incarnation of all human labour” %%[[KV1C2P187L18]]%% through the production of gold? 
Still considering gold production, the production of gold as a money-commodity, as the process on which the joint “social process of production in a purely atomistic way” %%[[KV1C2P187L20]]%% “assume a material shape [the gold standard of price]. [W]hich [appropriation] is independent of their control and their conscious individual action” %%[[KV1C2P187L22]]%%.
Really, we know that the appropriation of gold is dependent on our control of the territories, cursed and not blessed by productive mines. The antimining struggles are in that sense, mediating between the chances and the social accidents which determine the realization of the accumulation of profits, produced by the exploitation of the total labour advanced in a certain period. Labour is in that sense, overdetermining the profit rate fall, not only as variable capital, but historically, getting back at the circulation process with the natural power of class struggle.
Also, while the imaginary, ideal, character of the money-form of value or price of the commodities, highlight the fictitious essence of money and its permanent expulsion from the circulation process of commodities (C-M-C); the relevance of the analysis of the standard of price for the study of the reproduction crisis of finance capital may be critical for the development of theoretical assumptions build over Marx's critique to the political economy of the bourgeoisie society, considering the reforms to the gold standard of the international monetary system during 1968 and 1971, and its actual shift under the present critical juncture of transition to a new international monetary system, non-restricted by the dollar hegemony.