Dear Professor William I. Robinson,

I hope this message finds you well.

My name is José Manuel Mejía and I am writing to you because I am very interested in applying to the Ph.D. Sociology program of UC Santa Barbara. I follow and read part of your work about the transnational capitalist class and class struggles on the current overaccumulation crisis, and I believe that my research on antimining struggles in the Andes could be nourished and developed further with your mentoring.

There is still no "mainstream" interpretation about what is finishing -or what is being initiated- in the history of capitalism development: if this is the end of another cycle of systemic accumulation and of U.S. hegemony on global capitalism, or if this is the end of Western capitalism and systemic chaos will be developing soon as interstate competition for mobile capital advances in warefare. We are completely embedded in a critical juncture in which, as you said in a recent publication, other alternatives emerge for class struggles. I think that antimining struggles are a strategic field of class struggle, deeply rooted in history, and with evidential effects on the circuit of the TCC's capital accumulation.

I was studying antimining struggles in Peru since at least 2015, and I have seen how militarized accumulation and the transnational state operated in my case studies. The upward of foreign mining investment in the Andes since 2004 could be indicative of the magnitude of productive capital thrown to the circuit of extended capital reproduction by the TCC. While this already happened in other periods of material expansion of capitalism: as with colonial mining, then during the first quart of the XX century with the implantation of U.S. monopolistic capital in the central Andes, and in the '70s with the restructuration of mining and their expansion to the southern Andes. The actual voracity of capital accumulation is reaching its natural limits, and antimining struggles are progressively constituting a strategic field of contention for class struggle in the Andes with the indigenous peasantry at the vanguard. That is the statement that results from my research work about antimining struggles in the Andes as a obstruction challenge to the TCC's initiation of a new and more profitable reconstitution phase of global capitalism.

Please let me explain myself as I tell you a bit about my background, and why I am seeking to contact you.

I was born in Lima in 1986 as a third-generation migrant of an indigenous-cholo family from the central and southern Andes of Peru. I studied at the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos in a younger Political Science program created in an old Faculty of Law. Since then I get involved in the students' social movement from a not militant but combative position. My interests move completely from parties and regime transitions to protests, revolutions, and social movements as I adopted contentious politics as a framework. I published a coauthorship article in a Spanish social sciences journal about the fragmentation of Peruvian contentious politics. Then I finally apply to the Research Master in Political Sociology at the Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales - Ecuador and won a scholarship for international students to complete my grade. My thesis develops the contentious politics research program, tracing the escalation mechanisms operating in the antimining contentious campaign of Cerro Quilish defense in Cajamarca, Peru.

I was living in Quito for some years when the October protests starts in 2019. I recognized the performances of mobilization used by the antimining "espartambos" of the Tambo's Valley in Arequipa (Peru), and their use of artisanal shields at the front or first lines. The militarized repression against non-armed civil masses in Quito was bravely contested before and after the arrival of the indigenous peasantry organized in their federations. I didn't know yet why those high levels of repression were executed, so brutally, the masses could not explain themselves either. Now I am conscious that it is capital accumulation, precisely, these levels of repression are the ones that the TCC is enforcing while attempting to initiate another militarized accumulation expansion phase, as a means for global capitalism reconstitution at the current overaccumulation crisis.

The October protests of 2019 in Quito coincide with the beginning of my MA in Latin American Studies at the Universidad Andina Simón Bolivar - Ecuador. That struggle changed me, I consequently change my work, I reclaim my relation with class struggle as a political sociologist, I opened again to Marxism, and introduce imperialism as a regime of accumulation particularly related to mining and mining struggles. As I was writing the thesis titled "Luchas campesinas contra la expansión de la frontera extractiva. Minería imperialista y conflicto de clases en Cajamarca, Perú", the indigenous peasant movement was starting to develop their popular fronts to defend water and territory from the expansion of mining in Ecuador. With other ecological activists from social and live sciences, we organize the collective Surco Común to develop community and agroecology principles and get involved in the struggle against extractivism, joining in the Frente Nacional Antiminero and the current popular consultation to prohibit mining in Quito with other social movements organizations from the left and ecological movements.

I come recently to the United States, because my wife Mayra initiated her Ph.D. studies at Dartmouth College in September, and my English is improving. I got 81 in TOEFL iBT examination almost two years ago. But I know that the minimum for admission to the Ph.D. Sociology program is 80 points in the same examination, so I want to ask you If you consider that I should apply this year until December 1st, or get another TOEFL iBT examination and apply next year.

Looking forward to hearing from you.

Sincerely,

José Manuel