Parts of Comprehensive Exam Response:

Geovanni Arrighi

In _The Long Twentieth Century_ (2002), Arrighi provides a comparative analysis of “successive systemic cycles of accumulation”.  In this concept, he suggests that the history of world capitalism moves through a succession of hegemonic stages.  Each stage expands on the previous and transition from one to the other through a period of accumulation and crisis.  Each successive cycle is headed by a leading hegemon.  In this piece, Arrighi investigates the history spanning the entire “lifetime of historical capitalism as a world system” stretching the “space-time horizon of our observations and theoretical conjectures” to see “tendencies that seem novel and unpredictable” as familiar (2002: 4). While Arrighi does look at the twentieth century, the larger portion of this text actually captures the genesis of pre-capitalist accumulation beginning in the early 15th century under what he categorizes as an already capitalist Dutch hegemonic cycle of accumulation followed by a successive progression of hegemons. Arrighi left the task of full world historical analysis to Braudel and instead took up the task of “processing [Braudel’s] overabundant supply of conjectures and interpretations into an economical, consistent, and plausible explanation of the rise and full expansion of the capitalist world system” (2002: xi). In doing so, Arrighi was able to “break down the entire lifetime of the capitalist development (Braudel’s longue durée) into more manageable units of analysis…called cycles of accumulation” (ibid: xi). The different stage of capitalist development are titled Genoa, Holland, Britain, and US “due exclusively to [these country’s] successive centrality in the formation of these stages” – this focus itself is acknowledged by Arrighi as limited and narrow. He does this, however, tactically to give structure to Braudel’s survey of world capitalism and extend the analysis from Braudel’s 1800s to the 20th century. In this focus, Arrighi seems to neglect class struggle and polarize the world-economy into core and peripheral locales.

In the remaining discussion of Arrighi’s work, I take a critical approach to assess his basic arguments and its limitations.  My intention with this unorthodox approach is to make clear the contra-position of two distinct approaches of political economy, one of which is noticeably established in Arrighi’s conception of history and capitalism.  The first, is a state-capital relation that plays itself out in nation-states and inter-state competition. This approach is acutely demonstrated in Arrighi’s work.  The second approach is a class-capital dynamic that is crucial to understand historical change and development. This alternative approach remains on the side-lines of most political economic works.  Robinson’s theory of global capitalism, later discussed, is an example of how this approach is employed, and from which I intend to expand for my dissertation.

Going back to Arrighi’s work, the contents of his work are based on cycles of accumulation, nation-state analysis within the world system, and capitalist state competition.  He defines these cycles of accumulation as  (1) patterns of recurrence and evolution, which are reproduced in the current phase of financial expansion and of systemic restructuring”; and (2) that such “anomalies of this current phase of financial expansion… may lead to a break with past patterns of past pattern of recurrence and evolution” (2002: 6). Arrighi follows the world-systems analysis that places the unit of analysis as the world system as a whole.  In this way, a world-system’s approach looks at the relations between states and situates these relations as constituents of the whole world inter-state system.  At the start, this approach is necessary to determine the systemic process and transformations of capitalism in world history but by placing focus on country-state relations over those of class relations would lead the investigation awry. My critique suggests that a radical, or rooted, analysis of capitalism cannot be realized if the true drive of social change, that is the struggle between forces and relations of production, is hidden by state bodies that hold itself over that of civil society.  Arrighi focuses on the “centrality of force” when looking at the “single historical process” of the “formation of a capitalist world-economy” to determine the “distribution of costs and benefits among participants in the market economy” (2002: 19).  While this focus maybe useful, he actually does not look at social forces that interact to change the course of history or the laboring populations on the ground from which is capital derived; rather, he is speaking about country-state units and their interactions with each other that constitutes the interstate world economy. It is this approach that makes world systems analysis and world political economy too abstract, broad, and detached from the deeper social processes between social groups with the main focus on the holders of Power.

In his analysis of capitalist competition, he suggests that a fundamental change in the mechanisms of inter-state competition for mobile capital

“have a clear built-in limit. Capitalist power in the world system cannot expand indefinitely without undermining inter-state competition for mobile capital on which the expansion rests.  Sooner or later a point will be reached where the alliances between the powers of state and capital that are formed in response to this competition become so formidable that they eliminate the competition itself and, therefore, the possibility for new capitalist powers of a higher order to emerge. (2002: 18)

For the most part Arrighi got it right, however, his logic drives to a fatalistic and non-dialectical conclusion. The limits of state-competitive system may reach an end but the alliance between capital and state has not become so formidable as to eliminate all competition.  This would suggest an immutable relationship that does not incur contradictions of its own or can be unbound by the forces of history.  Rather, I would suggest that this relationship between capital and state has changed under our current era of global capitalism.  Power increasingly concentrates in the hands of a few oligarchical core countries, but with this change between capital-state, new forms of competition emerge outside of the nation-state paradigm as corporations of the nation-state relinquish itself from the institutions of state in order to capture mobile capital abroad.

Furthermore, competition between capitalist states is a struggle for hegemony.  Arrighi defines hegemony as state-specific epochs of hegemony rather than hegemony of a form of capital-labor relation. He privileges the state expression over that of capital as a relation of power.  While he still conceives of the role of the state as an instrument to the advancement of capital, he does not carry through in his work Marx’s analysis of capital-labor relation. Arrighi defines hegemony as “the power of a state to exercise functions of leadership and governance over a system of sovereign states… the government of a system of sovereign states has always involved some kind of transformative action…[to change] the mode of operation of the system (2002: 27).  Hegemonic power is “something more and different from “dominance” … [i]t is the power associated with dominance expanded by the exercise of “intellectual and moral leadership”” (ibid: 27). Arrighi interprets Antonio Gramsci’s hegemony functioning at the “national level in which the supremacy of a social group manifests in the ability to dominate when exercising power and lead once in power” (ibid: 27-28). The analysis makes sense when pertaining to the relation between social forces of capital and social forces of labor as Gramsci’s analysis of hegemony specifically focuses on “social groups” to designate power relation. However, to contain these social groups in the unit of nation-states, as what Arrighi suggests, would be to essentialize this unit of power to all of history, whereas the formation of nation-states is historical. Since Arrighi seems to suggest that power only resides within the form of nation-states, hegemony therefore can only take the form of nation-states and struggle for hegemony is only between nation-states (expressed through inter-state competition). This is to look at Gramsci’s hegemony only at the national level, while mistaking this form to be the only form in which societies can embody.

Moreover, in competition for hegemony amongst states, Arrighi determines that firstly “a dominant state exercises a hegemonic function if it leads the _system_ of states in a desired direction and, in doing so, is perceived as pursuing a general interest. It is this kind of leadership that makes the dominant state hegemonic” (2002: 89).  Thus “[a]t the level of the individual states, an increase in the power of the state vis-à-vis other states is an important component and…measure of the successful pursuit of a general (that is, national) interest”.  The second criteria supposes that  “a dominant state may lead in the sense that it draws other states onto its own path of development…[T]his kind of leadership can be designated as ‘leadership against one’s own will’ because, over time, it enhances competition for power rather than the power of the hegemon” (Schumpeter, (1989: 89) cited in Arrighi, 2002: 29).  As states compete with each other for hegemony then, “power cannot increase for the system of states as a whole…but increase for a particular group of states at the expense of other states, but the hegemony of the leaders of that group is at best “regional” or “coalitional,” not a true world hegemony” (Arrighi 2002: 29).  However, within the era of imperialism, power of the capital can still grow and ever increasingly as the productive power of the world system increases. Arrighi’s analysis is useful to suggest that as one group of states (which can be perceived as a social group) gains dominant power, it does so at the expense of other states to become a hegemon. Once again, capitalist competition until the mid 20th century produced hegemons within the confines of the nation-state that have captured regional control.  But as the capitalist system globalizes, the leadership of control and ownership of capital would also gain global reach which breaks out from a regional sphere.

In the continuing struggle for hegemonic control of the capitalist system, Arrighi incorporates the participation of formerly-colonized countries. 

Third World countries now had to compete with the fragments of the Soviet empire in gaining access to the markets and resources of the capitalist West. And the capitalist West, under US leadership, moved quickly to take advantages of the situation to tighten its de facto global “monopoly” of the legitimate use of violence. (2002: 22).

I agree with this interpretation but only to the point of placing US at the lead of capitalists worldwide, not just in the West. To this condition, the US serves to usher in the new phase of globalization with is monopoly over use of force through its unlimited use of sanctions and military intervention. The era of the West versus the rest ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union, which in actuality was not a competition between Western powers and Eastern powers, but rather capitalism versus socialism.

Arrighi’s theory necessitates that interstate competition took the form of developed versus developing nations.  This is mostly seen by political scientists in the “rise” of Asian tigers.  However, I must point out that this notion fundamentally rests on essentialist and racist notions to explain development that did not take place in the West. In reality, as globalization emerges, nation-states are forced to respond to the imperative of capital as it is rearticulated and finds greater accumulation transnationally.  Nation-states must attract mobile transnational capital in the form of mobile capital investments in-country and trade deals abroad to increase national productivity that would further integrate the country’s economy into the globalizing world economy. Therefore, as Third World countries compete for access to markets and resources, they do not do so to enter into competition with the West but to become more integrated and at the same time formerly become part of the capitalist agenda.  In this way, the capitalist system continues to expand with these new market spaces for capital investment and accumulation.

In addressing the enlargement of the system by globalization, Arrighi asserts that

[t]he global expansion of this system [that is the Westphalia system model of nation-states] will then be described as consisting of a series of transitions, in the course of which the system as previously instituted broke down, only to be reconstituted on wider social foundations. This preliminary analysis ends with the late twentieth-century crisis of the enlarged and thoroughly transformed Westphalia System…[from which a] new research agenda will be formulated which focuses more directly on the “space-of-flows” of business organizations than on the “space-of-places” of governments”…systemic cycles of accumulation will begin. (2002: 23)

Arrighi’s is right to suggest that with a new phase of capitalism, we must develop a new way to address these changes. However, does this wider social foundation reside in the nation-state? Because while he suggests that the previous Westphalian system of nation-states have broken down, what parts of it broke down? In what ways has it broken down? First having made the nation-state unit of governance a global model for newly liberalized countries to take after, the formations of nation-state would form unevenly along the contours of the colonial and imperial histories that befell these societies. Therefore, new nation-states in the era of globalization are not the same in form and essence as those that constitute the traditional centers of capitalist power in Western Europe and North America.  This is a nuanced analysis that account for the changes within the process of capital in its becoming; something that is missed within mainstream world systems analysis in the era of globalization. In addition, Arrighi suggest that capitalism is expanding but does not suggest it is intensifying.  This is the opposite of Robinson’s theory of global capitalism.