# Introduction
The effects of the antisystemic resistance of the antimining movement in Los Andes express the advance of the development of the class struggle in the identity formation of historical challengers in absolute contradiction (Lenin 1914; Anderson and Hudis 2007) to the reproduction of the imperialists bourgeoisies finance capital through the mining circuit of accumulation.

Mining in Los Andes is at the center of the foundational processes of the modern world-system and in the metabolic processes of reproduction of finance capital in the current world-economy\footnote{“[W]orld economy includes all these economic phenomena which, all in all, are based on the relations between human beings engaged in the process of production. By and large, the whole process of world economic life in modern times reduces itself to the production of surplus value and its distribution among the various groups and sub-groups of the bourgeoisie on the basis of an ever widening reproduction of the relations between two classes —the class of the world proletariat on the one hand and the world bourgeoisie on the other”” (Bukharin [1929]1966:26–27)}. The development of the processes of production and circulation of colonial and imperialist mining, and gold mining in particular, have structured the social formation and historical resistance of the indigenous-cholo peasantry, against militarism, dispossession and expansive destruction of the vital values for their social reproduction: water and land.

This is evidenced by the genocide of the “indigenous” peoples of Abya Yala, the exploitation of the survivors in colonial mining, as well with the massacres of their proletarianized children and grandchildren indigenous-cholo peasants with the imperialist implantation of U.S. monopolist capitalists trusts’ finance capital inter-“nationalized” in mining enclaves in Los Andes. Militarism as a policy of expansion of the imperialists bourgeoisies to control or guarantee the functioning of the mining circuit for the reproduction of their finance capital, is a persistent feature of the coloniality of the current mining problem. As well as a nodal point of his antiimperialist solution in Los Andes. In the origine of the formation of the modern world-system that began in the sixteenth century and in the world-economy of imperialism development during the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, the massacres and exploitation of the indigenous-cholo proletarianized peasantry in the mines of Los Andes operated as a constant under colonial mining and imperialist mining.

Colonial mining in Los Andes was the foundational method of the expanded original accumulation of the sixteenth century (Cueva [1977]1999:63–78; Marx [1886]1976:874-875,915) corresponding to the material expansion of the European oligarchic banking bourgeoisies (Arrighi 1994) that emerged from the concentration of merchant capital in the Middle East during the thirteenth century (Abu-Lughod 1991), shaping the modern world-system. Imperialist mining is a vital process of production and hoarding for the extended reproduction of finance capitals with differentiated trajectories of centralization and concentration (Bukharin [1929]1966) guaranteeing their inter-“nationalization” through militarism (Luxemburg [1913]2015).

In their effort to conceptualize the antisystemic effects of the movements produced by the systemic structural processes of the world-economy, Arrighi, Hopkins, and Wallerstein (1989:90) treated the antisystemic effects as caused by the centralization of capital as a world-scale tendency highly developed under the world-economy of imperialism, and highlighted the divergence of the potentially challenging [new] social sites/footnote{“Social sites consists of loci in which organized human action occurs; they include individuals, aspects of individuals, organizations, networks, and places” (Tilly 2002:xi). Arrighi et al. (1989) used the category locales or social locales in the same direction as the category social sites defined by Tilly. We are considering the definition of social sites as a plausible translation of the category social locales from the world-system analysis to which I believe is congruent.} of the antisystemic movements. However, the causal mechanisms that connect the constitution of antisystemic identities in absolute antagonism with the metabolic need of expansive reproduction of contending finance capitals with different levels of centralization and concentration, have not yet been evidenced. 

As the events presented, the emergence of new challengers with not only abstract but absolute antagonistic identities appears as reminders of the development of the history of class struggle. We build a hypothesis of causal mechanisms to answer the question: How the anti-mining struggles produce anti-systemic effects on the reproduction of capital by the imperialist bourgeoisies?
We argue that the antisystemic effects of historical challengers formed by the expansive structural processes vital for the reproduction of competing finance capitals under conditions of shared imperialism in Los Andes, are real in their consequences. 

Antimining struggles have world-scale effects over the decreasing of the rate of profit of the top-layer of the imperialists bourgeoisies, the *inter-"national" bank state capitalists trusts* by: the obstruction of the circulation time in the transformation of surplus value into profit, as well as disrupting the advanced capital organic composition of the imperialist bourgeoisies investing in the mining reproduction circuit of accumulation, over the state capitalist’s trusts monetary-gold hoarding and trade. The effects of antimining struggles on the metabolic mechanisms of capital reproduction are antisystemic, also because its absolute antagonist identity exacerbates the imperialistic competence for material expansion facing a forthcoming re-partition imperialists wars.

We state the following hypothesis: the indigenous-cholo historical antisystemic resistances formed with, and in antagonism to, the systemic structural processes vital for extended capital reproduction are real by its effects (Merton 1948). The antimining struggles have antisystemic effects by decreasing the top-layer-class of the world-economy of imperialism expected rate of profit through the circuit of mining accumulation, by effectively blocking its capital circulation by obstructive performances of struggle. In that manner, delaying its circulation time and disrupting the expected organic composition of finance capital advanced in the production of surplus-value shaped as a mass of mining-commodity-capital, and its posterior metamorphosis into total super-profit.

Indigenous-cholo antimining struggles, indeed, triggers gold hoarding by imperialists bank state trusts, because gold-holdings are money-capital and commodity-capital at the same time. But in contrast with monetized-capital in form of paper-money -pure currency-, gold-money-capital hold its surplus-value form of commodity-capital. And in that manner, its transformation in profit can be delayed when the rate of profit decreases. As we will explain here onward, because of the delay in the circulation of the finance capital of the international bank capitalists state trusts, the antisystemic obstruction of antimining struggles trigger the raising of the constant capital magnitude of its organic capital composition, amplifying its decreasing effect in the rate of profit, and consequently a reduced amount of surplus-value is transformed into total profit. Indeed, disrupting the production of surplus value and the rate of profit expected by the imperialists bourgeoisies in ongoing militarist competition for the expansion of their mining accumulation circuits, by means of imperialist wars or imperialists interventions oriented to establish its relations of production on the “national-economies” in which the mining precious “raw” materials are situated, as in Los Andes.