Mining struggles international significance in class struggle critical juncture at the current systemic crisis of global capitalism
%%hegemony crisis and breakdown, and the natural limits of capitalism reproduction%%

Q3: How anti-mining struggles in the Andes developed in a historical context marked by the crisis and breakdown of the U.S. hegemony, world statecraft and escalation of social conflict?

Argument: Andean anti-mining struggles are a subset of mining struggles developing since the beginings of the XXI century, principally, by the sustained mobilization of indigenous peasantry in unique popular fronts to protect water, land and people from mining transnational companies. Water and land are imprescindible values for the social reproduction of the peasantry as a class, a main portion of which is indigenous in the Andes. Miner's struggles since the beginnings of the XX century, struggles for land during the second half of the same past century, and the more recent stuggles for water at this first quart of the XXI century, forge a peasantry which resists and contest capital accumulation in the Andes as a class antagonist to the TCC. As movements contesting the expansion of the extractive mining frontier in the Andes, anti-mining struggles challenges the mining international bourgoisie of the TCC.
1) the violent pulsion to material expansion, as a response of the TCC to the current crisis of global capitalism, rise the investments of productive capital in Andean mining. The upward scale shift of the mining extractive frontier imply the concentration of water and land for mining operations despite the social reproduction of Andean indigenous peasantry. 
2) by the contamination of water and land values as an inevitable consequence of mining operations, the TCC destroy the social reproduction conditions of the indigenous peasantry. The  brave indigenous peasantry who challenge capital accumulation and imperialism directly in anti-mining struggles, are contesting the reconstitution of global capitalism while fighting for their future life and labor conditions. In the opposition to the international mining bourgeoisie, indigenous peasantry reforce popular coalitions in the building of effective mobilization structures, developing unique fronts with environmentalists, marxists and non-marxists lefts, and mass popular organizations in anti-mining contentious campaigns.
3) the indigenous peasantry emerges one more time in Andean class struggle challenging militarized accumulation. Obstructing the circuit of capital accumulation of the TCC by blocking the production and circulation of mining commodities, anti-mining struggles are in the vanguard of antisystemic movements at a turning point in the history of global capitalism.