# The process of exchange
p.178[1-17]
Marx is explaining the particularity of the process of exchange, as a process separated from the whole process of capital reproduction. As Marx explained before, the process of exchange is different from the process of production of capital (Marx [1939]1973, 86,89):

> "Distribution determines the relation in which products fall to individuals (the amount); exchange determines the product[s] in which the individual demands the portion allotted to him by distribution. Thus production, distribution, exchange and consumption form a regular syllogism; production is the generality, distribution and exchange the particularity and consumption the singularity in which the whole is joined together" [...]. Production is determined by general natural laws, distribution by social accident, and the latter may therefore promote production to a greater or lesser extent; exchange stands between the two as formal social movement; and the concluding act, consumption, which is conceived not only as a terminal point but also as an end-in-itself, actually belongs outside economics except in so far as it reacts in turn on the point of departure and initiates the whole process anew." (Marx [1939]1973, 89).

Indeed, the point of departure of the exchange process is the socially divided outcome of capital production (capitalism wealth): a mass of commodity-capital in transition to a money-capital form as totally consumed as exchange-values and completed its circulation as commodity-capital. So, for his analysis of the process of exchange, Marx starts with the commodity form as such, ready for exchange.

The bearer exists as a recourse for the social movement of the commodities in exchange, and as the bearer of relations of appropriation. Furthermore, exchange relations of transference between commodities and money are determined by the social movement of capital. Exchange formalize the quantitative distribution of the appropriated value produced as surplus value in its transformation into profit, by completing the exchange process with the return of its exchange-value as money augmented from the sale of the commodities produced with certain amount of capital advanced, at a price (C) superior than its cost price, that can be reduced to the sum of the total capital (k) and the total surplus value (s).

> "[[Commodities cannot themselves go to market and perform exchanges in their own right. We must, therefore, have recourse to   their guardians, who are the possessors of commodities. Commodities are things, and therefore lack the .power to resist man. If they  are unwilling, he can use 'force; in other words, he can take possession of them. In order that these objects may enter into relation  with each other as commodities, their guardians must place themselves in relation to one another as persons whose will resides in  those objects, and must behave in such a way that each does not appropriate the commodity of the other, and alienate his own, except through an act to which both parties consent. The guardians must therefore recognize each other as owners of private property."

2626:40 p 177 en Karl Marx - Capital, Volume 1
https://go.atlasti.com/b0853060-83cf-45ff-8c33-f41b894b4007/documents/6bf9416f-b560-46d7-845c-8071da674a66/quotations/1d17b397-7728-4a20-aa07-725566daf34c
]]