Chapter 3: Money, or the Circulation of
Commodities
I. THE MEASURE OF VALUES
Throughout this work I assume that gold is the money commodity, for the sake of simplicity.
The first main function of gold is to supply commodities with the material for the expression of their values, or to represent their values as magnitudes of the same denomination, qualitatively equal and quantitatively comparable. It *us acts as a universal measure of value, and only through performing this function does gold, the specific equivalent commodity, become money.
It is not money that renders the commodities commensurable. Quite the contrary. Because all commodities, as values, are objectified human labour, and therefore in themselves commensurable, their values can be communally measured in one and the same specific commodity, and this commodity can be converted into the common measure of their values, that is into money. Money as a measure of value is the necessary form of appearance of the measure of value which is immanent in commodities, namely labour-time,

The expression of the' value of a commodity in gold -x commodity A = y money commodity- is its money-form or price. A single equation, such as I ton of iron = 2 ounces of gold, now suffices to express the value of the iron in a socially valid manner. There is no longer any need for this equation to figure as a link in ■.. the chain of equations that express the values of all other commodities, because the equivalent commodity, gold, already possesses. the character of money. The general relative form of value of commodities has therefore resumed its original shape of simple or individual relative value. On the other hand, the expanded relative expression of value, the endless series of equations, has now become the specific relative form of value of the money commodity. However, the endless series itself is now a socially given fact in the shape of the prices of the commodities. We have only to read the quotations of a price-list backwards, to find the magnitude of the value of money expressed in all sorts of commodities. As against this, money has no price. In order to form a part of this uniform relative form of value of the other commodities, it would have to be brought into relation with itselfs its own equivalent.