# KV1C2
In the beginning was the deed. Fausto
Devil lives in the details.

Marx is tracing the determinants of the exchange process particular of the bourgeois society in its initial conditions. The process of exchange is the starting point in the circulation of commodity-capital, beginning not with its production as use-values, but it is their realization as exchange-values what then allows its consumption as use-values. 

The first distinction treated is the one between the commodity and the bearer. 
The comparison between the commodity and its bearer. For the [bearer] his commodity possesses no direct use-value.[[KV1C2P179L13]]
For himself its only direct use-value is as a bearer of exchange-value, and consequently, a means of exchange. [[KV1C2P179L15]]
The second is the determination of a universal equivalent as a consequence of the expansion of the exchange process.
From the perspective of the individual each of the bearers treat his own commodity in exchange as the universal equivalent for all other commodities.
The third one corresponds to the transformation of gold, the money-commodity, to monetarized capital.

In the transition between the exchange of use-values, and the exchange of commodities, there is a determinant detail. And more than a detail, the particularity of the exchange process, an original mistake, a social accident, acted then thought: treat something that is not for being appropriated as a commodity. 

In the exchange process the capitalist as bearer of a commodity treat something that is not a use-value as an exchange-value, and fix its use as a mean for exchange while appearing in the process of exchange as if it would have the exchange-value form of commodities. The determinants of the exchange process are rooted in the history of the formal social movement of the commodities, because the exchange of use-values in upward scale-shift, requires a relative form of value reached by social accident by one commodity which is both commodity and money: gold, and also other precious metals in history, that is fixed as an universal equivalent.

> "In their difficulties our commodity-owners think like Faust: 'In  the beginning was the deed.' They have therefore already acted before thinking. The *natural laws of the commodity* have manifested themselves in the natural instinct of the owners of commodities. They can only bring their commodities into relation as  values, and therefore as commodities, by bringing them into an  opposing relation with some one other commodity, which serves  as the universal equivalent. We have already reached that result by  our analysis of the commodity. But only the action of society can  turn a particular commodity into the universal equivalent. The  social action of all other commodities, therefore, sets apart the  particular commodity in which they all represent their values. The natural-form of this commodity thereby becomes the socially recognized equivalent form. Through the agency of the social  process it becomes the specific social function of the commodity which has been set apart to be the universal equivalent. It thus becomes money." [[KV1C2P180L24]]

The historical expansion and intension of the process of exchange is the process of taking everything that is possible as *something* (LCWV38P108L17) to appropriate, as if it was a commodity, with the purpose of appear as its owner as an exchange-value, seeking to receive a equivalent exchange-value in form of the most circulated exchange-value as mean of payment. And therefore, by the escalation of its compulsive subsumption over circulation as determinant of the: "need to give an external expression to this opposition [between use-value and value which is latent in the nature of the commodity] *for the purposes of commercial intercourse* produces the drive towards an independent form of value, which finds neither rest nor peace until an independent [value]form ["independent from its own use-value" [[KV1C2P182L34]]] has been achieved by the differentiation of commodities into commodities and money. The use-value of something is distinguished from its usefulness as a mean for exchange. 

> "Money necessarily crystallizes out of the process of exchange, in  which different products of labour -are in fact equated with each  other, and thus converted into commodities. The historical  broadening and deepening of the phenomenon of exchange develops the opposition between use-value and value which is latent in the nature of the commodity. The need to give an external expression to this opposition for the purposes of commercial intercourse produces the drive towards an independent form of value, which finds neither rest nor peace until an independent form has  been achieved by the differentiation of commodities into commodities and money. At the same rate, then, as the transformation  of the products of labour into commodities is accomplished, one particular commodity is transformed into money. The direct exchange of products has the form of the simple  expression of value in one respect, but not as yet in another. That  form was x commodity A = y commodity B. The form of the direct exchange of products is x use-value A = y use-value B. The  articles A and B in this case are not as yet commodities, but become so only through the act of exchange." [[KV1C2P181L7]]

> "What appears to happen is not that a   particular commodity become: money because all other commodities express their values in it, but, on the contrary, that all  other commodities universally express their values in a particular  commodity because it is money. The movement through which  this process has been mediated vanishes in its own result, leaving trace behind. Without any initiative on their part, the commodities find their own value-configuration ready to hand, in the  form of a physical commodity existing outside but also alongside  them. This physical object, gold or silver in its crude state,  becomes, immediately on its emergence from the bowels of the earth, the direct incarnation of all human labour. Hence the magic of money. Men are henceforth related to each other in their social process of production in a purely atomistic way. Their own relations of production therefore assume a material shape which  is independent of their control and their conscious individual action". [[KV1C2P187L9]]
 
Gold mining was already a branch of production centralized in the hand of capitalist production, before, during, and after the transition of mercantile capital into industrial and finance capital. So the social accident of the expanded circulation of gold-money as capital and mainly the decision to use it as mean for exchange, as universal equivalent, is not an accident for the individual gold bearer who as bearer of the money-commodity want to exchange every other commodity avoiding alienating his money-gold in the process of exchange as an exchange-value.

> "The difficulty lies not in comprehending that  money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why and by what  means a commodity becomes money." [[KV1C2P186L24]]



