The dialogue between Leistyna and Freire left an example of the relational epistemology proposed with the recognition of dialogue as a process of understanding a knowable object.
It's precisely an epistemological relation approach different from the common descriptive dialogues, as it recognize the actual impossibility of coming to know. The shared neccessity for knowledge is preceded by the recognition of epistemological curiosity as the introduction of uncertainity on the relation of knowledge.
Dialogue is different from education as bureaucratization of minds, as it involves the development of skills rather than develop their epistemological curiosity moving together (with the teacher) toward a joint effort of sincere knowledge advancement (theory oriented).
Dialogue also is different from the democratic allocation of voice proportionally, so the division of participation time is given by the number of students in the classroom, and not by the development critical approaches given the reduced amount of time required for their elaboration.
"apparent emphasis on equal opportunity to participate, strategically disrupts any possibility for profound theoretical engagement and analysis" (p.20).
The dialogue between Leistyna and Freire also brings out the positionality of the enuntiation, the historical determination of the concrete experience of the world are undeniable, but the job of the educator as a learner is to connect those experiences to the resr of the world. In this sense, the generalization of knowldge holds as an aim. The challenge is to trascend without losing touch of that place, which is the site of enunciation.
In that sense also, to get in a dialogue, within a relational epistemology, implies also accept the requirement for knowledge to engage with the unknown on a number of levels (p.21).
This principle, as point of departure, mentioned Freire "lead to unity in diversity" as "a level of understanding alternative perspectives while being able to critically situate ourselves in whatever the debate may be" (p.21).
In this common understanding, by the relational epistemology of intercultural dialogue, Freire propose a shared ethical struggle to validate "what needs to be validated" and to "eradicate what is negative" (p.21). For example, he mentioned the tendency to cumulate prejudices when we face the differences with intolerance, as if differences implied inferiority or superiority.
Indeed, the epistemic task is to identify the differences and mostly the similarities within them, taking as principle for the building of knowldege the unity in diversity (p.22).
The recognition of those similarities on the base of the recognition of their difference requires an essentially critical understanding, within the perspective unity in diversity constituted as principle for intercultural dialogue, of the common definition of the "really necessary" "and what is superficial", bringing together common goals (p.23). This as a tool, become the "cutural glue" of the educator as an artist's of multiple cultural manifestations.
Freire recognized also that the movement toward this pedagogical process of dialogue implies a leadership grounded in the community politics level, and not from outside. Blurring the division between the political and the social, or economical, as analytical divisions of the social metabolism.