How is the movement toward an universal absolute subject suppose to forget the implications of its reductionist totality? It is valid to build a concept without specifying the commonalities between its empirical referents or cases?  Statements as: "all the parts", "all the individuals", "all the processes" "all the world", are incapable of specify or connote the determinants of the "global" or its self-creative force: "globalization". The classification power of the concept is empty, so on the number of concrete cases or qualitative particularities of the concept as useful, except to refer to the imagination of the movement into-itself, or to express formally a tautology as "global society". As if the validity of two general categories in an statement, would not necessarily imply its differentiation. No way.  With the statement "global society", one of the categories in contradiction becomes in relation to the whole, as a particularity and then as a case. If it is not possible to specify the determinations of its concrete particularities. Is not a useful concept for description. If the dynamic between its analytic processes repeats the same concept-building strategy, it will be impossible to find an analytical use for the "globalization process" concept. If the existence of a "global society" is given by granted. It is because of the will of some consciousness, or the omissions of the philosophers. And, why not?, mainly, because its being useful precisely as a non-concept, appearing as a product of knowledge of current use.  Are there ""global" "societies"" in concrete plurality, empirically, beside the abstract totality referenced by the concept "global society"? Or it is a category with only one possible empirical referent? If it is a sole-empirical-referent-category, and that category is built as a totality. Its fertility as a concept useful for classification is inherently absent. If the category global society or globalization specifies its determinants, and by implication attempt to represent a set of empirical cases, concrete essences in history. The abstract concept overlap with other categories backed by theories, as world-economy, imperialism, or modern world-system, internationalization of capital (capital mobility), state building. There we find the mystery of globalization as a commodity.