An, I know I shouldn't be writing to you, I hurt you and I know also I'm not good for you. I'll do my best always to not be what I was for you, I really want to be loved and love in a manner that also can hold that love, without loosing the person you love, an I understand now, without loosing yourself. I really want you to finish your dissertation, to held in your ideas and positions by yourself, to continue finding ways, thinking beyond what others as me can't see, being that lovely and careful person that I knew and loved too much. I don't want to make you cry more, I hope that in one moment your and me can heal and maybe in one point, have a hug of you that can change this feeling again, in a manner in which only that act can do.




Vietnam women (31) first generation immigrant born in US, grew up in a Vietnamese colony in California. Her father fought for the south Vietnam army against the north communist unification of Vietnam who collaborated with the military which contested the advance of the northern revolutionary forces. She migrated at 4 years with the help of her granduncle with her complete family, as part of the program of reincorporation offered by US to this prisoners' of war. Finally after her studies in Orange County and UC Riverside supposed to hold a long term committed and exclusive relation with her partner which sexually hold until the year 2023 on October in which I became her "second" one. William Robinson talked about An since the beginning by Zoom to me, making a gesture with his hands simulating a shape of a guitar and a funnel, after, he mentioned another potential Marxist prospective graduate student. And that I will met them on the Open Event of the Sociology Department soon. An give me a ride from the airport to the hotel in Santa Barbara when that occasion came at march 2023. The days after that I met her to go to Woodstock pizza, then taking beer at the table mentioned that she preferred to drink "wine in bed" watching a movie. After that in the table with other graduate students of the sociology department as David Feldman, and Ali Yagmur, she said that my spouse Mayra should be "circulating as a commodity" while I was there in Santa Barbara. Since the first days of October 2023, An started to hangout with me very frequently and I reacted by inviting her to cocktails and trying to kiss her. After a week or two we started a sexual relationship, which was timed by a weekly necessary breakup required for "space and time" by An. This behavior was conducted during a process of intense and sexual interrogation in which I was interviewed about class struggle in the Andes, particularly in Ecuador and Perú, also inquired at a point in which I was asked for bibliography references and quotes of Marxist literature. While the Gaza crisis almost immediately activated the student movement in the US connected with the spread of PSL and the political work in the universities by SJP among undergraduate, graduate students and faculty, An advanced and pushed my breakup with my now ex-spouse Mayra, asking me several times if I divorced from Mayra. When I went to Ecuador and Peru during 2023 and 2024, she insisted in communication by camera in WhatsApp in which sexual behavior also occurred. She wanted to make sure that I didn't was wit Mayra, and to trigger me to come back with her. Her role in the college politics also shows that the position of Robinson and An coordinated with her nexus to PSL and the community in Santa Barbara, Cristina Awada, connections stablished directly by Robinson in Los Angeles, as well as the ones made with the oldest left and migrant communities mainly Mexican and linked immediately to the American Palestinian Struggle (APS). The position of An in the college politics as well as with community organizations in Orange County (LA), was always oriented to guarantee the conditions to push this struggle, first by disliking the leadership of SJP in the student association of UCSB in coordination with a reduced collective, and second by promoting in any conditions the development of the encampment campaign before the leadership of SJP took the decision. This performances are hidden as "vanguard movements", but if the complete movie is watched, the push of the struggle by this apparently "radical leftist" is completely ensuring that in any conditions the "escalation" should be reached. The precipitation of the occurrence of the encampments was temporally aligned with the higher point of arrestments caused by the antagonization of police while asking for non direct action, without any political will nor leadership which responded for the increasing number of arrests and the final demobilization of the encampments nationally, without any political responsibility nor response. At the backward of SJP and PSL as the main organizations developing the APS you can find a network of individuals operating as guarantors of the timing and performative constrains while claiming for "radicalization" and "escalation". Projecting the APS as the "experience of struggle" which "American kids" need to grow their "political consciousness" in this process. This "experience" is heavily influenced and manipulated by the social media consumption of two main platforms: Instagram and Signal, both of which are composed by a combination of Sino-American capital grew in the south of the US. At the backward of the APS was in development a CIA covered operation, well prepared to guarantee the conditions and constrains of the social struggle provoked by Israel on an Islamic religious framework which Americans ignore as they demonstrated during all their instances of intervention in Gaza and the Middle East. Her prospective action was directed to broke my marriage with Mayra, seen as a challenge for the fraction of the US national bourgeoisie which William Robinson and Hoai-An Nguyen obey. My analysis of the theory of global capitalism of Robinson and the stubborn defense of An, locate the concept of "transnational" capital and "transnational" state as a the theoretical veil which hides the political real conditions for the dominance of the world economy by a handful of capitalists, which is negating the shared imperialism of the Sino-American capital. Robinson's theory hides the real composition and configuration of the political dominance over the world economy, in complete ignorance of the process of capital as a whole, he holds that capitalism is creating a surplus humanity completely indispensable. What this assumption hides is that the events in which this surplus humanity have been created by the same militarism operation of imperialist capitalism expansion.