# The Resurgence of Historical Challengers: The Andean Peasantry's Anti-Mining Movement as an Anti-Systemic Movement

The formation of the class structure of the modern world-system is founded on the racialized international division of labor produced by colonization as a policy of expansion of merchant capital. Around ten million “indigenous" survived the genocide planned in Los Andes of an estimated total of sixty five million exterminated over the continental “America", being sublimated as inferior beings and reduced to mere labor force by the colonization method of primitive accumulation (Marx [1886]1976:873–875, 914; Mariátegui, January 16, 1929:78; Quijano and Wallerstein 1992; Quijano [1999], 2007, 169-170; Mignolo 2011, 183–84).

The world no longer fit into the consciousness of the survivors. But in their collective consciousness a myth survived. Or a myth makes sense in our consciousness, it is the myth of the new indigenous, of the Inkarri (the Inka return), of the Yawar-Inti (Sun of Blood) and the resurgence of the “indigenous" world by a revolutionary vendetta. In opposition to Arboleda's (2020) interpretation of the formation of indigenous “identity politics"\footnote{Martín Arboleda stated: ““Already in the 1990s, before socalled “identity politics” gained prominence in international academic circles, Ecuadorian philosopher Bolívar Echeverría—a renowned theoretician of cultural syncretism and capitalist modernity in Latin America—was already puzzled by the self-defeating cultural essentialisms of emerging variants of Latin American indigenous politics. Pre-Hispanic cultures in the Americas, he argued, were undergirded by profoundly relational cosmologies and hence were unable to perceive the “Other” as independent alterity. The otherness they perceived in the Spanish colonizers was for them a mere variant of the sameness of their own collective self. The European mindset, on the other hand, always construed the cultural other in terms of radical alterity, as absolute negation of their own identity” (Arboleda 2020:210).}, I argue that the revolutionary subjectivity that conjures up indigenous socialism is a historical formation in movement, a block of living historical text clashing, developing the peasantry as an antagonist class in formal subsumption since the sixteenth century. 

For both Arboleda (2020) and Bolívar Echevarría, the indigenous peoples could not understand the antagonism between them and the Spaniards. Their cosmology, they believe, did not allow the indigenous to realize that they were being killed by an external collective antagonistic to their lives or “collective self." If someone follows that argument, by implication this indigenous “self-defeating cultural essentialisms" would only change with the later appropriation of Hegelian logic as the basement for the reproduction of the sublimating rationality of “European mentality". By implication, its since the encounter of the “indigenous" peoples with this “European mentality" that their descendants are able to interpret “the cultural other in terms of radical otherness, as an absolute negation of its own identity". In short, it must be understood that Bolívar Echevarría should have ideologically omitted the work of the Peruvian anthropologist Luis E. Valcárcel, so as not to force an approximation to the work of José Carlos Mariátegui, who found an indigenous revolutionary subject already in motion when they were going to work on its politicization at the beginning of the twentieth century. Fortunately, the work of Alberto Flores Galindo ([1985]2010) did justice to this problem by tracing the myth of the Inkarri in indigenous and popular struggles emblematic of the history of Peru. 

As the first worker-intellectuals became the prophets of this myth, indigenous socialism was forged in the early twentieth century as the convergence of the “cholo group"\footnote{The “cholo group" is a social stratum which formation arises from the mass of the servile or semi-servile indigenous peasantry, differentiated by the incorporation of elements of Western-Creole culture. However, at the same time, they sustain, preserve, and recognize their difference and their origins in the indigenous culture and in the social structure of the indigenous peasantry, as the social formation from which we depart (Quijano 1980:63-65).} with the indigenous peasantry in historical resistance. The work of socialist politicization undertaken by Mariátegui, Mayer and Valcárcel (among others) in the organization of the bases of socialism in Peru and in the creation of indigenous socialism, they found already in motion the myth of indigenous resurgence. In which framework of interpretation, the revolution is carried out as vendetta for the new indigenous, their remnants, their sons and grandsons. The socialist revolution as a movement and horizon was already operating in Los Andes, when El Amauta José Carlos Mariátegui and the cholo group which he constituted with other intellectual workers of the proletariat in formation, began their work of politicization. 

Mariátegui wrote in the prologue to Valcárcel's Tempest in the Andes (1927): “I remember the unexpected and impressive type of agitator I found four years ago in the indigenous from Puno, Ezequiel Urviola. This meeting was the greatest surprise that Peru had in store for me on my return from Europe. Urviola represented the first spark of a fire that was to come. He was the revolutionary indigenous, the socialist indigenous. Tuberculous, hunchbacked, he succumbed after two years of tireless work. Today it does not matter that Urviola does not exist. It is enough that he existed. As Valcárcel says, today the mountains are pregnant with spartacus" (Mariátegui in the prologue to Valcárcel 1927:11).

The history of the class struggle in the Andes definitely precedes socialism, but most important, the indigenous-cholo peasantry learned to instrumentalize it. Thus, by the first quarter of the twenty-first century, the indigenous-cholo peasantry has not only effectively instrumentalized socialism (and Marxism) but also environmentalism (Mejía 2021), fixing its discursive articulation on the recognition of sensitive entities such as mountains, rivers, and lagoons (de la Cadena 2020). As De la Cadena emphasized about the visionary work of José María Arguedas: “[t]he totality, Todas las Sangres proposed an alternative indigenous social movement, a critical ally of the modern left, but with its own a-modern hybrid logic. Literacy and modern politics were important, but they had to be used and translated selectively, rather than eradicating indigenous customs" (2005:18). 

Hybridity in this sense is performative and not a reproduction of Western modernization as acculturation, but rather the cholos as indigenous descendants have been building their own cultural logic that recognizes their origins, while appropriating Western-modern cultural objects, as we do with the socialist and ecological frames of interpretation in the anti-mining and mining struggles of the twenty-first century. As evidence the three case studies: i) the cholo-peasantry antimining struggles in Cajamarca (Peru) during the 2004 and 2011-2012 against the Newmont Gold Mining Corporation headed in the U.S., ii) the indigenous-peasantry mining struggles in Apurímac (Peru) during 2015 and 2019 against the MMG of China Minmetals Corporation (CMC), and iii) the indigenous-cholo peasantry antimining struggles in Cotopaxi (Ecuador) during 2023-2024 against the Atico Mining Corporation headed in Canada. The cholo-indigenous peasantry updated their interpretation of mining from a class perspective, nurtured by ecological discourses and indigenous cosmopolitics (de la Cadena 2020) in the defense of water, land, life and biodiversity.

## The Historical Resistance of the Cholo-Indigenous Peasant Struggles Against Imperialist Mining in the Andes

\subsection{The Historical Resistance of the Cholo-Indigenous Peasant Struggles Against Imperialist Mining in the Andes}
 
Imperialist mining is a central productive and hoarding process for the extended capital reproduction of the most advanced economic formations of the imperialism world-economy in competition for their inter-“nationalization"./footnote{This concept is widely explained in the next section.}
Although the institutional and military foundations of imperialist domination in Los Andes were settled with implantation of the monopolistic finance capital of the most centralized bank capitalists state trusts of the U.S., through extractive enclaves on the most profitable industries of ours (Andean) semi-colonial "national-economies" during the period 1895 to 1930 (citar Cueva y Quijano ademas de mariategui). From the beginning of the twentieth century, the mining industry in the Andes was under the almost exclusive control of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie. Mining was one of the industries where capitalism developed most rapidly, especially in the Andes, where from 1895 monopoly capital was directed toward large-scale mining, oil production, and agriculture Peru (Mariátegui 1928:21:REVISAR; Quijano 1988:116-21).

In fact, the mining struggles of the central Peruvian highlands workers unions were executing active antisystemic resistance since their genesis in the first miners strike against the Cerro de Pasco Corporation (CPC) of January 7, 1919 - inspired in the advancements of the proletariat in Europe and the Soviet Revolution of October 1917 (Melgar Bao 2020, 132)- until the end of the 1980s.  The processes of union formation and politicization of the mining proletariat of the central highlands of Peru went through a trajectory of radicalization during most of the twentieth century. This trajectory of radicalization diffused to the medium and small mines at the national level, as well as to the mines of the southern highlands –as was evidenced by the massacres of 1957 and 1966 in the mines of Toquepala (Moquegua) exploited by the Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC)–. Mines opened for the "nationalization" of the finance capital of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie through the Cuajone contract, secretly signed by the "nationalist" military government of Velasco Alvarado.\footnote{The Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC) was founded in 1952 by the American Mining and Smelting Company (ASARCO), which at the first decade of the 1900s operated the mining reproduction circuit of the finance capital bearers, as the Phelps Dodge Overseas Capital Company, the Cerro de Pasco Corporation (CPC), and the Newmont Mining Company, which concentrated already by 1901 20% of copper melting and 15% of copper refinement at a world-scale (Pérez-Jiménez 2018:490). Evidencing the continuum of exclusive monopolistic operation of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisies centralized formations in Peru during the complete twentieth century.}

While during the 1980s, the co-optation of the mining workers unions of the Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC) was consolidated as a result of the enforcement of its institutionalization trajectory. Meanwhile, the intensity and harshness of the militarism executed against the protests of the mining workers in the central Peruvian highlands exploited by the Cerro de Pasco Copper Corporation (CPC), evidenced the disruptiveness of the transgression carried out by the mining workers struggles as a direct challenge to the main reproduction circuit of capital accumulation. The systematic application of his militarism policy over the copper mines of the central highlands of Peru since 1903 was evidenced by the massacres of Malpaso (1930), Cobriza (1971), as well as the militarized repression of the miners' strike campaign of the mid-80s, repressed with the imprisonment of hundreds of unionized miners. and the assassination of Saúl Cantoral in 1988 by the "Rodrigo Franco Commando" task force, a paramilitary criminal organization for annihilation that operated under the first government of Alan García.

However, the radicalization of the miners' protests developed in the face of militarized repression. The formation of a vanguard of the Peruvian proletariat in open confrontation with the U.S. imperialist mining bourgeoisie, developed until the 1980s, when the PCP-SL and the MRTA began armed struggles in Peru. The trajectory of radicalization of the struggles of the miners became an anti-imperialist challenge, operated in a context characterized by the escalation of the armed struggle in Latin America, and mainly by the resolution of the imperialist struggle between the U.S.S.R. and the U.S., defined by the consequences of the Sino-Soviet secession.

The formation of the basis for the horizontal centralization of Sino-American finance capital developed, gradually after the shared imperialist resolution of the Vietnam War, and the subsequent implementation of market reforms in China by Deng XiaoPing in 1978. Until the early years of the 21st century, marked by the September 11 attacks on Wall Street, the Pentagon and the White House. When, under conditions of shared imperialism, these financial capitals begin a process of separation and rupture, gradually reducing their horizontal centralization. Thus, constraining the inter-"nationalization" of U.S. bank capitals as finance capital circulating through the economic formations of China's industrial production.

Indeed, U.S. and China imperialists bourgeoisies share the conditions of accumulation for their mutually consented capital concentration and inter-"nationalization" in the period between the 70s and the first decade of the 2000s, with a breaking point in 2008 denoting the asymmetry of their rates of profit, considering as an indicator the money-capital amount accounted for its gold reserves, as surplus-value congealed under the shape of gold-commodity-capital and gold-money-capital at the same time (Figure 4).

The advanced inter-“nationalization" of the Chinese finance capital during the 2000s executed by a higher centralized China state capitalists trust, gradually took advantage of the institutional and military conditions established by the U.S. imperialists bourgeoisies to operate in Peru. In twenty years, China's state capitalists trust finance capital built a considerable expansion of its participation in Peruvian copper mining, although still incipient in gold mining, through the China Minmetals Corporation (CMC).

The differentiated imperialists mining bourgeoisies are in the core of the inter-"nationalized" organization of finance capital, subjugating the industrial mining production of the semi-colonial "national-economies" in Los Andes, to the whole circuit of reproduction of the highest economic formations resultant from different trajectories of centralization at a "national-economy" scale. Correspondent to the higher levels of capital concentration of the imperialism world-economy, since the transition from Great Britain to the U.S. modern world-system hegemony, around the first years of the "long twentieth century".

Under this situation of shared imperialism in Los Andes, a political regime of militarism and terrorist state violence is indiscreetly instrumentalized to guarantee the maximums rate of surplus-value and rate of profit for the top-layer economic formations at a world-scale. Nevertheless, the horizontal decentralization of Sino-American financial capital have differentiated effects for the accumulation circuit of each imperialist bourgeoisie, according to its own levels of concentration and centralization. In addition, the effects on a world-scale of the advanced horizontal decentralization of Sino-American finance capitals, exhibit differentiated consequences on the systemic structural processes of production and circulation, giving shape to the next transitory formation that necessarily will imply a new international division of labor.

# El resurgimiento de desafiadores históricos: el movimiento antiminero del campesinado Andino como movimiento antisistémico

La formación de la estructura de clases del sistema-mundo moderno es fundada en la división internacional del trabajo racializada producida con la colonización como política de expansión del capital mercantil. Alrededor de diez millones de "indígenas" sobrevivieron al genocidio planeado en "América", siendo sublimados como seres inferiores y reducidos a mera fuerza de trabajo por el método de colonización de la acumulación originaria.

El mundo ya no cabía en la consciencia de los supervivientes. Pero en su consciencia colectiva sobrevivió un mito. O un mito tiene sentido en su consciencia, es el mito del nuevo indio, del Yawar-Inti (Sol de Sangre), y el resurgimiento del mundo indígena por una venganza revolucionaria. 
En oposición a la interpretación de Arboleda (2020) sobre la formación de la "política de identidad" indígena, sostengo que la subjetividad revolucionaria que conjura el socialismo indígena, es una formación histórica en movimiento, bloque de texto histórico vivo chocando, desarrollándose como una clase campesina antagonista en subsunción formal desde el siglo XVI.

Martín Arboleda afirma: 
"Ya en la década de 1990, antes de que la llamada "política de identidad" ganara prominencia en los círculos académicos internacionales, el filósofo ecuatoriano Bolívar Echeverría —un reconocido teórico del sincretismo cultural y la modernidad capitalista en América Latina— ya estaba desconcertado por los esencialismos culturales autodestructivos de las variantes emergentes de la política indígena latinoamericana. Las culturas prehispánicas en las Américas, argumentó, estaban apuntaladas por cosmologías profundamente relacionales y, por lo tanto, eran incapaces de percibir al "Otro" como una alteridad independiente. La otredad que percibían en los colonizadores españoles era para ellos una mera variante de la mismidad de su propio yo colectivo. La mentalidad europea, en cambio, siempre interpretó al otro cultural en términos de alteridad radical, como negación absoluta de su propia identidad" (Arboleda 2020:210). 

Tanto para Arboleda (2020) como para Bolívar Echevarría, los indígenas no podían entender el antagonismo entre ellos y los españoles. Su cosmología, creen, no permitió que los indígenas se dieran cuenta de que estaban siendo asesinados por un colectivo externo y antagonista de su vida o "yo colectivo". Algo que sólo cambiaría con su aprendizaje de la lógica hegeliana, como esa "mentalidad europea" a partir de la cual la "política de identidad indígena" pudo interpretar "al otro cultural en términos de alteridad radical, como negación absoluta de su propia identidad". En definitiva, hay que entender que Bolívar Echevarría debió omitir ideológicamente la obra del antropólogo peruano Luis E. Valcárcel, para no forzar una aproximación a la obra de José Carlos Mariátegui, quienes encontraron un sujeto revolucionario indígena ya en movimiento cuando iban a trabajar en su politización, a principios del siglo XX. Afortunadamente, el trabajo de Alberto Flores Galindo (2010), hizo justicia a esta problemática rastreando el mito del Inkarri en luchas indígenas y populares emblemáticas de la historia del Perú.

A medida que los primeros obreros-intelectuales se convertían en los profetas de este mito, el socialismo indígena se forjó a principios del siglo XX como la convergencia del "grupo cholo"\footnote{El "grupo cholo" es un estrato social cuya formación surge de la masa del campesinado indígena servil o semiservil, diferenciado por la incorporación de elementos de la cultura occidental-criolla. Sin embargo, al mismo tiempo sostienen, preservan y reconocen su diferencia y sus orígenes en la cultura indígena y en la estructura social del campesinado indígena, como la formación social de la que parten (Quijano 1980:63-65).} con el campesinado indígena en resistencia histórica. El trabajo de politización socialista que emprendieron Mariátegui, Mayer y Valcárcel en la organización de las bases del socialismo en el Perú y en la creación del socialismo indígena, se encontró vivo con el mito de resurgimiento indígena. En cuyo marco de interpretación, la revolución se realiza como una venganza por los nuevos indígenas, sus remanentes, sus hijos y nietos. La revolución como movimiento y horizonte ya estaba operando en los Andes cuando El Amauta José Carlos Mariátegui y el grupo cholo que constituía con otros obreros intelectuales del proletariado en formación, iniciaron su trabajo de politización socialista. 

Escribe Mariátegui en el prólogo de "Tempestad en los Andes" de Valcárcel (1927):

"Recuerdo el inesperado e impresionante tipo de agitador que encontré hace cuatro años en el indio puneño Ezequiel Urviola. Este encuentro fue la sorpresa más grande que Perú me reservó a mi regreso de Europa. Urviola representaba la primera chispa de un fuego que estaba por venir. Era el indio revolucionario, el indio socialista. Tuberculoso, jorobado, sucumbió después de dos años de trabajo incansable. Hoy no importa que Urviola no exista. Basta con que existiera. Como dice Valcárcel, hoy las montañas están preñadas de espartacos" (Mariátegui en el prólogo a Valcárcel 1927:11).

La historia de la lucha de clases en Los Andes definitivamente precede al socialismo, pero lo más importante es que el campesinado indígena aprendió a instrumentalizarlo. Así para el primer cuarto del siglo XXI, el campesinado indígena no solo ha instrumentalizado efectivamente el socialismo (y el marxismo) sino también el ecologismo (Mejía 2021), fijando su articulación discursiva en el reconocimiento de entidades sensibles como montañas, ríos, y lagunas (de la Cadena 2020). Como enfatiza De la Cadena (2005:18) sobre el trabajo visionario de José María Arguedas: "[l]a totalidad, Todas las Sangres propuso un movimiento social indígena alternativo, un aliado crítico de la izquierda moderna, pero con una lógica híbrida a-moderna propia. La alfabetización y la política moderna eran importantes, pero había que utilizarlas y traducirlas de manera selectiva, en lugar de erradicar las costumbres indígenas". 

La hibridez en este sentido es performativa y no una reproducción de la modernización occidental como aculturación, sino que los cholos como descendientes indígenas han ido construyendo una lógica cultural propia que reconoce sus orígenes, a la vez que hace suyos los objetos culturales occidentales-modernos, como lo hacen con los marcos de interpretación socialistas y ecologistas en las luchas antimineras y mineras del siglo XXI. Así lo evidencian los casos de las luchas antimineras de Cajamarca (Perú) (Mejía 2021) y Cotopaxi (Ecuador), el campesinado cholo e indígena actualizó su interpretación de la minería desde una perspectiva de clase alimentada por discursos ecológistas y cosmopolítica indígena (de la Cadena 2020) en defensa del agua, la tierra y la vida.

## La resistencia histórica de las luchas campesinas cholo-indígena contra la minería imperialista en Los Andes

La minería imperialista es un proceso productivo y de acaparamiento central para la reproducción generalizada de capitales financieros en competencia por su inter-"nacionalización". Si bien, la burguesía imperialista de los capitales financieros que controlan los carteles y consorcios formados en Estados Unidos sentaron las bases institucionales y militares de la dominación imperialista en Los Andes desde principios del siglo XX; el avance de los procesos de inter-"nacionalización" del capital financiero del consorcio estatal Chino aprovechó gradualmente las condiciones institucionales y militares establecidas por la burguesía imperialista estadounidense para operar en el Perú. En veinte años, China construyó una expansión considerable de su participación en la minería peruana de cobre aunque incipiente en la minería de oro. En estas condiciones de imperialismo compartido como régimen político de acumulación militarista, la violencia estatal terrorista se emplea indiscretamente para garantizar la máxima tasa de ganancia para las burguesías imperialistas contendientes.

Desde principios del siglo XX, la industria minera en los Andes estuvo bajo el control casi exclusivo de la burguesía imperialista estadounidense. La minería fue una de las industrias donde el capitalismo se desarrolló más rápidamente, especialmente en los Andes, donde desde 1895 el capital monopólico se dirigió hacia la minería a gran escala, la producción de petróleo y la agricultura. La burguesía minera es una fracción hegemónica de la coalición de dominación imperialista en el Perú (Mariátegui 1928:21; Quijano 1988:116-21), y uno de los nodos centrales del circuito de acumulación de la burguesía imperialista. En efecto, las luchas mineras llevadas a cabo por los sindicatos mineros fueron, desde su génesis hasta finales de los años 80, principios activos de resistencia antisistémica en el Perú. 

Los procesos de formación sindical y politización del proletariado minero como vanguardia en la sierra central del Perú pasaron por una trayectoria de radicalización durante la mayor parte del siglo XX. Esta trayectoria de radicalización se desarrolló extendiéndose a las minas medianas y pequeñas a nivel nacional, así como a las minas de la sierra sur -como lo evidenciaron la represión militarista en las masacres de 1957 y 1966 en Toquepala (Moquegua)-, abiertas a la "nacionalización" del capital financiero de la burguesía imperialista estadounidense como inversión extranjera directa mediante el contrato de Cuajone, firmado en secreto por el gobierno militar "nacionalista" de Velasco Alvarado.

Así durante la década de los 80 se consolidó la cooptación de los sindicatos mineros de la Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC) como producto de su trayectoria de institucionalización. La intensidad y dureza del militarismo aplicado contra las protestas de los trabajadores mineros en la sierra central peruana explotados por la Cerro de Pasco Copper Corporation (CPC), evidenció la gravedad de la transgresión ejecutada por las luchas mineras como un desafío directo al principal circuito de acumulación del capital financiero de los consorcios capitalistas estadounidenses. La aplicación sistemática de su política militarista sobre las minas de cobre de la sierra central del Perú desde 1903, se evidenció con las masacres de Malpaso (1930), Cobriza (1971), así como con la represión militarizada a la campaña de huelgas mineras de mediados de los 80, reprimida con el apresamiento de cientos de mineros sindicalizados, y el asesinato de Saúl Cantoral en 1988 por el "Comando Rodrigo Franco", fuerza paramilitar de aniquilación que operó bajo el primer gobierno de Alan García. Sin embargo, la radicalización de las protestas de los trabajadores mineros se desarrolló de cara a la represión militarizada. La formación de una vanguardia del proletariado peruano en abierta confrontación con la burguesía minera imperialista norteamericana avanzaba hasta los 80 en que el PCP-SL y el MRTA iniciaron luchas armadas en el Perú. 

La trayectoria de radicalización de las luchas de los trabajadores mineros se convirtió en un desafío antiimperialista, en un contexto caracterizado por la escalada de la lucha armada en América Latina en general, y principalmente por la resolución de la contienda imperialista entre la U.R.S.S. y los EE.UU. definida por las consecuencias de la secesión sino-soviética. Desarrollándose la formación de las bases para la centralización horizontal del capital financiero Sino-americano, gradualmente después de la resolución imperialista compartida de la guerra de Vietnam y la posterior aplicación de las reformas de mercado en China por Deng XiaoPing en 1978. Hasta los primeros años del siglo XXI marcados por los ataques del 11 de septiembre a Wallstreet, el Pentágono y la Casa Blanca. Cuando, todavía en condiciones de imperialismo compartido, estos capitales financieros inician un proceso de separación reduciendo gradualmente su centralización horizontal.

Constriñendo así la "nacionalización" del capital bancario estadounidense como capital financiero circulando en las formaciones económicas que centralizan la producción industrial de China. Compartiendo de esa manera las condiciones de acumulación para su concentración consensuada en ese periodo que va de los 70 a la primera década del 2000, con un punto de quiebre en el año 2008 denotando la asimetría de sus tasas de ganancia, expresada en el comportamiento contrario de sus tasas anuales de plusvalor. Considerando como indicador el valor dinerario de sus reservas de oro, como plusproducto y dinero-oro a la vez (Figura 4).

La descentralización horizontal de los capitales financieros sino-americanos, tiene efectos diferenciados para el circuito de acumulación de cada burguesía imperialista en función de sus propios niveles de concentración y centralización. Además, los efectos a escala mundial de la descentralización horizontal avanzada de los capitales financieros sino-americanos exhiben consecuencias diferenciadas sobre los procesos de producción y circulación, dando forma a su próxima formación transitoria que implica necesariamente una nueva división internacional del trabajo.