The "full development of capital [...] takes place", when "capital has posited the mode of production corresponding to it". How, or more interesting, when capital reproduction dominated human reproduction? Marx will specify what he means by the form assumed by capital in its "full development", as an initial condition described as the instance when the means of labour are introduced in the production process as fixed constant capital, as purchased commodities completely excluded from its appropriation for other aims rather than the production of profits for its owner. But, is precisely for that reason, that those means of labour as values are also constrained, "suspended in its immediate form" of use-values after being purchased by the capitalist (M-C). %%[[GNBVIIP609L1]]%%
In that sense, the means of labour became fixed capital, as are commodities under consumption, burning in its transformation process into the money-form of capital. The means of labour became fixed capital when are purchased as commodities, but are not consumed with the same velocity than human labour (variable capital). Holding their elementary form of use-values for a limited time, predictable in average, during its transformation process into money. So, considerated as constant due to its fixed turn-over time in the production stage of the circuit of capital -but, not because of that reason exempt from social accidents.
In this mode, capital oppose labour, dominating the production process also by subsuming the concrete "skillfulness of the worker" to a "technological application of science", which requires only direct labour reduced to a "mere moment of this process", to neccessarily abstract labour time. In this relation, organic for capital reproduction, the quantity of labour depend on the requirements determined by the advancement of the production forces (science); mainly given by the productivity of capital as the reduction of its variable part due to an increment of its constant part in its organic composition. Resulting, contradictory, in a rising quantity of commodity-capital produced, that contains a dimminished component of value embodied ("objectified labour") in its money-form or price.
While "labour time [...] is posited by capital as the sole determinant [...] of the creation of use-values" in the circulation process, it becames the common element shared by all the commodities as universal measure of its exchange-values. But at the same time, it is reduced quantitatively to its average as a standarized smaller proportion, and qualitatively reduced to the indispensable activity subordinated to the technical composition of capital, given by a certain social combination of labour and capital. The capital composited in social combination "appears as a natural fruit of social labour", "althought it is a historic product" of the methods of accelerated accumulation, which are the methods of primitive accumulation, extended disspossesion of the peasantry and indigenous as a sine qua non condition for the appropiation of its means of labour and of gold and silver: the alineable form of indigenous wealth correspondent to the development of merchant capital, as commodities for exchange or hoarding. %%[[GNBVIIP700L4]]%%
The subsumption of the "forces of nature" to the scientific process of labour, shaped it "as a quality of fixed capital in contrast to living labour". While being appropiated in the scientific process of capital production, individual labour becames productive as labour -socially- exchanged as an ideally measured average of neccessary labour time "represented by and concentrated in capital". So, labour as the common element of universal equivalency between commodities, also determinate the magnitude of their exchange-value as commodity-capital threw to circulation. Furthermore, the "worker's ability" to exchange is due to its circulation as capital, this means, because his exchange, as the appropiation of its product as a portion of the (variable component of) total capital advanced, is mediated by its transformation into commodity. Then the consumption of energy substances for their own reproduction as living labour, depends on its participation in the exchange process as wage-owners, as all the process of use-values exchange is mediated by money in the circuit of capital. %%[[GNBVIIP700L14]]%% "Capital in the form of circulating capital posits itself as mediator between the different workers" %%[[GBVIIP701L13]]%%.
As means of labour, fixed capital increases the value of the commodities produced only if those are use-values product of human labour, and insofar as its increment in the composition of capital increases the ratio between surplus labour and socially necessary labour time by rising its productivity creating a larger quantity of commodities.%%[[GNBVIIP701L16]]%% Stepforward, Marx wrote: "required for the maintenance of living labour capacity in a shorter time". This last statement, could be identificated as a discontinuity among the 1854 Notebooks of Marx compilated in the publication labeled as "Grundrisse", and his late Economic Manuscrits of 1864-1865. As the reproduction of capital is not oriented to produce the required use-values to maintain the living labour capacity in a shorter time, but to the maximization of the rate of profit. As the portion of surplus value captured into profit after the consumption of certain amount of the total capital advanced as productive capital. 
The lived illusion of the proletarians imagining being socially reproduced by capital is a burgher delirium, which not only negated the dictatorship of capital subsuming labour, but also the militarism with which the reproduction of capital operate using the perfectioned methods of primitive accumulation. Its antagonism is totally expressed with the aniquilation of the class in struggle, of the living labour raised in revolt.
The productivity of labour operate increasing the proportion of capital that employs machinery, reducing only to the minimum total amount of labour necessary "to realize a maximum of labour in the maximum number of such objects". If we follow Marx reference to fixed capital as capital constituted "as a product of labour and of alien labour merely appropiated [purchased or dispossessed] by capital". This imply the posit of the minimum amount of neccesary labour time enough to being exchange-values with value, objectified living labour embodied in the maximum quantity of commodities possible to produce under: i) determined technical composition of fixed capital (expressed in the quantitative magnitudes of living labour time and of the other products of nature and labour) given by an specific stage of development of the production forces; and ii) by the organic composition expressed by the rate of cost price  between the total capital advanced for wages as variable capital, and the constant capital advanced for the purchase of the products of alien labour appropiated as raw materials, instruments, and means of production. Thrown as fixed productive capital to the circulation process during a specific turn-over time, for the sole aim of its reproduction as an augmented quantity of money captured as profit. %%[[gnbviip701l30]]%%
The increased productive force of labour or productivity of labour express the increase of an alien force of production outside itself, and the diminishment of its labour's forces to the minimum neccessary. Appearing as a process which is benevolently augmenting the free time of the workers, doing with velocity what labour cannot do solely with their own force, while actually replacing the workers force with machinery force in the production of capital. It's important to recognize here that the increment of the constant capital result necessarily in the diminishment of its variable component, as the total capital advanced as the total cost price of production (K) is composed by the sum of the total variable capital advanced in the money-form of wages (v) blass the sum of the total constant capital advanced (c). When the magnitude of constant capital is equal to the cost price declared by the capitalist as the imaginary equivalent of the money-form of value of all the use-values appropiated by capital production, distinct from living human labour, able to being declared as a constant magnitude for a determined turn-over time (k=v+c; >c|<v). The increment of c result in a diminishment of v, and consequently in a reduction of the proportion of surplus-value transformed into profit, as the difference between the rate of profit and the rate of surplus value is equal to the total surplus-value extracted from the total variable capital advanced (s/v), minus the total augmented money captured while completed the circuit of the total capital advanced by including the discount of the total constant capital consumed slower than its counter variable part (s/v+c; s/k). %%[[GNBVIIP702L18]]%%
The separation of capital between means of labour, raw materials, and the commodities produced, are converted into two different forms of capital: the means of labour delay its consumption in the production process holding its elementary form as use-values for a determined amount of turn-over times, introduced in the circuit of capital reproduction as capital fixed as capital that don't turn-over with the same velocity than the circulating capital composed by that mass of commodity-capital ready for circulation and the raw materials, the products of nature without which, as well as without human labour productive capacity, the reproduction process of capital isn' possible. The fixed capital becames the constant capital advanced in means of labour as use-values being amassed in the price of the resultant mass of commodity-capital produced by certain amount of capital advanced in certain time. The velocity of fixed capital is lower than the velocity of circulating capital, because the metamorfosis of a use-value into another exchange-value mediated by the production process, as productive capital, require the material consumption of the means of labour which due to the living necessities of the mass of living labour, ocurr with a different velocity.%%[[GNBVIIP703L1]]%%.
2024-11-18 04:02