2024-11-18 12:31
The “full development of capital […] takes place”, when “capital has posited the mode of production corresponding to it”. How, or more interesting when capital reproduction dominated human reproduction? Marx will specify what he means by the form assumed by capital in its “full development”, as an initial condition described as the instance when the means of labour are introduced in the production process as fixed constant capital, as purchased commodities completely excluded from its appropriation for other aims rather than the production of profits for its owner. But, is precisely for that reason, that those means of labour as values are also constrained, “suspended in its immediate form” of use-values after being purchased by the capitalist (M-C). %%[[GNBVIIP609L1]]%%. As it is stated by Marx: "fixed capital [...] is the part of capital which is locked into the production process" %%[[GNBVIIP710L24]]%%, but not only because of its physical qualities of durability in consumption %%[[GNBVIIP701L711]]%%, rather it is because its because the extended durability of its use-value that becomes means of production %%[[GNBVIIP711L6]]%%. Machinery as fixed capital, is different from the raw materials because the raw materials are consumed by the alien productive force of machines circulating smoothly in the production process, but instead, the means of labour can only being consumed during the production process as productive forces of value %%[[GNBVIIP710L24]]%%. Any interruption of the machine, obstructs totally the fixed capital conversion in circulating capital, as the machines are only producers of value if are in constant operation incrementing the labour power of living labour while subsuming its surplus-labour in the surplus-value resultant in the realization of the price of the mass of commodity-capital produced.  

In that sense, the means of labour became fixed capital, as are commodities under consumption, burning in their transformation process into the money-form of capital. The means of labour became fixed capital when purchased as commodities but are not consumed at the same velocity as human labour (variable capital). Holding their elementary form of use-values for a limited time, predictable in average, during its transformation process into money. So, considered as constant due to its fixed turn-over time in the production stage of the circuit of capital -but, not because of that reason exempt from social accidents as we will specify further.

In this mode, capital opposes labour, dominating the production process also by subsuming the concrete “skillfulness of the worker” to a “technological application of science”, which requires only direct labour reduced to a “mere moment of this process”, to necessarily abstract labour time. In this relation, organic for capital reproduction, the quantity of labour depends on the requirements determined by the advancement of the production forces (science); given by the productivity of capital as the reduction of its variable part due to an increment of its constant part in its organic composition. This is resulting, contradictory, in a rising quantity of commodity-capital produced, that contains a diminished component of value embodied (“objectified labour”) in its money-form or price. “[L]labour time […] is posited by capital as the sole determinant […] of the creation of use-values” in the circulation process, it becomes the common element shared by all the commodities as universal measure of its exchange-values.

Living labour reduced quantitatively to its average as a standardized smaller proportion, and qualitatively reduced to the indispensable activity subordinated to the technical composition of capital, given by a certain social combination of labour and capital. The capital composited in social combination “appears as a natural fruit of social labour”, “although it is a historic product” of the methods of accelerated accumulation, which are the methods of primitive accumulation, extended dispossession of the peasantry and indigenous as a sine qua non condition for the appropriation of its means of labour and of gold and silver: the alienable form of indigenous wealth correspondent to the development of merchant capital, as commodities for exchange or hoarding. %%[[GNBVIIP700L4]]%% The subsumption of the “forces of nature” of the scientific process of labour, shaped it “as a quality of fixed capital in contrast to living labour”. Appropriated in the scientific process of capital production, individual labour becomes productive as labour -socially- exchanged as an ideally measured average of necessary labour time “represented by and concentrated in capital”. So, labour, as the common element of universal equivalence between commodities, also determines the magnitude of their exchange-value as commodity-capital threw to circulation. Furthermore, the “worker’s ability” to exchange is due to its circulation as capital, this means, because his exchange, as the appropriation of its product equal to a portion of the (variable component of) total capital advanced, is mediated by its transformation into commodity.

Then the consumption of energy substances for their own reproduction as living labour, depends on its participation in the exchange process as wage-owners, as all the process of use-values exchange is mediated by money in the circuit of capital. %%[[GNBVIIP700L14]]%% “Capital in the form of circulating capital posits itself as mediator between the different workers” . %%[[GBVIIP701L13]]%%. As means of labour, fixed capital increases the value of the commodities produced only if those are use-values product of human labour, and insofar as its increment in the composition of capital increases the ratio between surplus labour and socially necessary labour time by rising its productivity creating a larger quantity of commodities..%%[[GNBVIIP701L16]]%%

Step forward, Marx wrote: “required for the maintenance of living labour capacity in a shorter time”. This last statement could be identified as a discontinuity among the 1854 Notebooks of Marx compilated in the publication labeled as Grundrisse, and his late Economic Manuscripts of 1864-1865. As the reproduction of capital is not oriented to produce the required use-values to maintain the living labour capacity in a shorter time, but to the maximization of the rate of profit. As the portion of surplus value captured into profit after the consumption of a certain amount of total capital advanced (k) as productive capital.

The lived illusion of the proletarians imagining being socially reproduced by capital is a burgher delirium, which not only negated the dictatorship of capital subsuming labour, but also the militarism with which the reproduction of capital operates using the perfectioned methods of primitive accumulation. Its antagonism is totally expressed with the annihilation of the class in struggle, of the living labour raised in revolt. The productivity of labour operates increasing the proportion of capital that employs machinery, reducing only to the minimum total amount of labour necessary “to realize a maximum of labour in the maximum number of such objects”. If we follow Marx reference to fixed capital as capital constituted “as a product of labour and of alien labour merely appropriated [purchased or dispossessed] by capital”.

This imply the posit of the minimum amount of necessary labour time enough to being exchange-values with value, objectified living labour embodied in the maximum quantity of commodities possible to produce under: i) determined technical composition of fixed capital (expressed in the quantitative magnitudes of living labour time and of the other products of nature and labour) given by an specific stage of development of the production forces; and ii) by the organic composition expressed by the rate of cost price between the total capital advanced for wages as variable capital, and the constant capital advanced for the purchase of the products of alien labour appropriated as raw materials, instruments, and means of production. Thrown as fixed productive capital to the circulation process during a specific turn-over time, for the sole aim of its reproduction as an augmented quantity of money captured as profit. %%[[gnbviip701l30]]%%

The increased productive force of labour or productivity of labour expresses the increase of an alien force of production outside itself, and the diminishment of its labour’ s forces to the minimum necessary. Appearing as a process which is benevolently augmenting the free time of the workers, doing with velocity what labour cannot do solely with their own force, while replacing the workers’ force with machinery force in the production of capital. It’s important to recognize here that the increment of the constant capital results necessarily in the diminishment of its variable component, as the total capital advanced as the total cost price of production (k) is composed by the sum of the variable capital advanced in the money-form of wages (v) and the constant capital advanced (c). When the magnitude of constant capital is equal to the cost price declared by the capitalist as the imaginary equivalent of the money-form of value of all the use-values appropriated by capital production, distinct from living human labour, able to being declared as a constant magnitude for a determined turn-over time (k=v+c; >c|<v).

The increment of c result in a diminishment of v, and consequently in a reduction of the proportion of surplus-value transformed into profit, as the difference between the rate of profit (p’) and the rate of surplus value (s’) is equal to the total surplus-value extracted from the total variable capital advanced (s/v), minus the total augmented money captured while completed the circuit of the total capital advanced by including the discount of the total constant capital consumed slower than its counter variable part (s/v+c; s/k). %%[[GNBVIIP702L18]]%% The separation of capital between means of labour, raw materials, and the commodities produced, are converted into two different forms of capital: the means of labour delay its consumption in the production process holding its elementary form as use-values for a determined amount of turn-over times, introduced in the circuit of capital reproduction as capital fixed as capital that don’t turn-over with the same velocity than the circulating capital composed by that mass of commodity-capital ready for circulation and the raw materials, the products of nature without which, as well as without human labour productive capacity, the reproduction process of capital isn’t’ possible. The fixed capital becomes the constant capital advanced in means of labour as use-values being amassed in the price of the resultant mass of commodity-capital produced by a certain amount of capital advanced in a certain amount of time. The velocity of fixed capital is lower than the velocity of circulating capital, because the metamorphosis of a use-value into another exchange-value mediated by the production process, as productive capital, requires the material consumption of the means of labour which due to the living necessities of the mass of living labour, occur with a different velocity. %%[[GNBVIIP703L1]]%%.

Indeed, fixed capital within the production process increases the “length of circulation time”. Resulting in the “decrease of the surplus-value which could be created in a given period of time _without […] interruptions_”. Anticipating his latest work in the transformation of surplus value into profit strongly modified in Engels’ edition of Volume 3 of Capital, compared with the delayed publication of the corresponding original section of Marx’s Economic Manuscrits of 1864-1865. Marx, earlier, in the _Grundrisse_ specified two mechanisms by which the incremental magnitude of fixed capital, physically determined by its elementary use-value form as machines employed in the production process. Indeed, fixed capital in form of means of labour are neccessarily the result of alien labour advanced as source of value during its previous specific production. So on, its “value [as] fixed capital is reproduced only in so far as it is used up in the production process” %%[[GNBVIIP703L30]]%%.

The metamorfosis of commodity-capital into augmented money-capital mediated by production, configures the circuit of capital reproduction, the transformation of fixed capital into circulating capital in constant flow is the determinant condition of capital reproduction. Given that in the production process fixed capital is operating only in so far is constant capital, machinery only producing value when is being used. Their use depend completely on the raw materials as source of energy, and the living labour minimally required for their operation. Only when the machines are operating with uninterrupted continuity -as constant capital-, constantly in the production process, fixed capital can be transformed into productive capital. The reason is because the “flow of reproduction” “becomes an externally compelling” force “outside”, but neccessarily conditioned by, living labour and nature. %%[[GNBVIIP703L33]]%%

Fixed capital, depending on its velocity of circulation can be or not continuously creating value with incremental returns to the pocket of the capitalists, only until a point in which the growth of fixed capital in proportion to the general growth of capital (k) reached an scale in which, due to the antisystemic impact of the interruptions, that by social accidents, “act as a direct reduction [force] of capital itself, of its initial value” %%[[GNBVIIP703L29]]%%.

Is critical to understand that the reason because those interruptions to the circulation of fixed capital decrease the rate of profit (p’), as the proportion of “surplus-value which could be created in a given period of time” from “the quantity of total circulating capital (k)” continuously engaged in the production process” (p’=s/k). Is because of the scale and proportion in which fixed capital composed the total capital advanced for circulation given a certain amount of time, until an actual point in which the large industry developed by and for capital reproduction, initiated its **antagonic** metabolism, its constant fall in the rate of profit, a dynamic of decreasing returns hidden by inflation and monetarization, multiplication of monetized-capital, inorganic capital as money not anymore oriented to the creation of value.

Because, if the total circulating capital is the sum of the cost price given by the total living labour quantifyed by the total price of wages and the total price of the constant capital composed by the fixed capital posited in their machine-use-value form and the raw materials appropiated in the process of commodity-capital production. And its first, pressupossed that certain quantity of minimum labour is required neccessarily for any production process. So, the minimum amount of variable capital, as the cost price of living labour time consumed, is always greater than cero (v>0). 

But that is not the case of fixed capital, counted as constant capital (c) in the composition of the total capital advanced for circulation. 


The reduction of labour time to its minimum neccessary, resultant from the increment of the productivity of labour by the technological development introduction of the powerfull efectiveness of machines as means of labour. Labour ceases to be the source of value or determinant of value in the production process of commodity-capital, as the increment of the sperfluous form of its value embodied in the commodity-capital produced expressed in its price, becames a condition of the mode of production or branchs of production characterized by the advanced development of labour productivity, due that the increment of money-capital depends, given the reduction of variable capital to the minimum neccesary cost price of wages, inflation of the commodity prices, its increment moves in antagonic direction to the maximum decrease of human labour time in the production process. 

Without this inflation, the fall in the rate of profit, due to an increment of the fixed capital posited in the powerfull efectiveness of machines as means of labour and the consequent reduction of the neccessary labour time to the minimum amount possible, will be expressed in the fall of the price of money, which is being rised symetrically with the price of commodities "to mantain the already created value as value" %%[[GNBVIIP706L8]]%%. Price value or money form of value, is measured in money and gold only insofar are related to the imagined quantity of human labour fictiously expressed in the standard of price. Furthermore, the rise of the commodities prices involve an increment in the quantity of money as mean of payment, accompanying the rise of the price of gold and money, but also increases the price of the commodities purchased as raw materials and means of labour, so on increasing the cost price of the fixed capital intervining in the production process.

After reaching the point of scientific development, a large mass of machines appears as the wealth of burgeoisies societies, large industry, large scientific progress, larger the mass of machines (c=>0|v>0; <v|>c). Any argument in favor of automation, can be rised in this particular point of time, but one fact holds: any knowed human technology have solutioned the impossibility of supplying energy to an alien force of appropriation (machine productive force) not only without any human regulation, but without sourcing the machine with energy supplies only possible to be provided always in certain degree by living labour.

Indeed, greater the impact of interruptions to the naturally delayed pace of circulation, the slow burn consumption of pricefull advanced and huge mass of machines, which if not used becomes not only a mass of commodities decorating the wealth of burgeoisie societies, but inorganic capital, fixed capital incapable of circulation, left out of circulation, interrupted, obstructed.

In the dystopian future in which capital reproduces itself, the appropiation of the products and forces of nature could be directly appropiated by the machines, without any human mediation, liberating its productive forces from human living labour, machines appropiates directly and unmediated their energy supplies from nature. If it exists, would be an organic capital for machines reproduction in which humanity only can hold its existence as a source of energy, capital reproduction tends to a complete inorganic relation with humans, as capital relation with nature, antagonic, inorganic, an merely alienable source of wealth. What before was variable capital or the cost price of the total labour time employed in the production process during a certain period, is replaced or extinguished, by the use-values that were means of labour, becomes the elementary form of value production force by subsuming human labour time for machine labour time or applying its equivalency or transformation (k=c+v; if v=0 so c->v). 

If machines are only machines, and don't create classes, and in that sense are nothing more than machines in a bag of machines, then only distribution but not exchange is required, as there is no individual neccesities nor appropiation, but the energy supply perfect distribution possible to extract from nature, so no exchange as there are not different neccessities there is not different use-values to exchange, as the neccessities of a pure machine force of production is centralized and concentrated for the most efficient direct distribution of the energy supplied by the products and forces of nature.

If the “ultimate development of the value-relation and of production resting on value” %%[[GNBVIIP704L28]][[DPRP70L29]]%% is the contradictory relation between capital subordinating labour by the mediation of money (L-M-C). In any case organic capital is inorganic nature, but organic nature is not anymore organic capital, as it is nature left ouf of capital production of value, it is outside the appropriation “process of nature” as an “industrial process” of production %%[[GNBVIIP705L17]]%%. "[N]atural material [being] transformed into organs of the human will over nature", "organs of the human brain, created by the human hand"; "the power of knowledge, objectified", proudfully "the general social knowledge" %%[[GNBVIIP706L30]]%% created its materiality in the transformation of machines in a direct force of production. In the paragraphs quoted above, Marx appeared to be in a breaking romance with science as the development of technical reason for the mastery of nature, for the appropiation of nature, as it rises its effectivity by the increasing intervention of the means of labour which requiere only a minumum neccessary amount of human labour for its energy supply and operation. 

At that moment, Marx appear to think in the development of scientific knowledge as condition for the extended productivity of the value creation forces, in a perpetual mastering of human over nature, as if the subordination of living labour to the reproduction of capital would dissapear with the cancellation of surplus labour as source of surplus value, while the mere appropiation of nature as capital, this is nature transformed in organic capital, is always inorganic nature, if its consumption as use-values acquired by production or by money, as capital for the production of commodity-capital, becomes inorganic capital, as it stop to produce value. 

The capital produced in this conditions of fall of the profit rates and general inflation of the price of commodities and the price of money and gold, maximize the quantity and price of monetized-capital, minimizing its value. So the capital is inorganic if its transformation stopped to be a metamorfosis of value, if the production of value is considered yet necessarily dependent on living labour force for the creation of use-values which exchange was directed to the satisfaction of human needs for social reproduction.

A "level of productivity" enough developed to reduce the labour time to the minimum neccessary, had been produced a capital overaccumulation, in a "level directly related to the [magnitude of value created by the] transformation of circulating capital into fixed capital" %%[[GNBVIIP707L24]]%%. The corresponding level of productivity should have been reached surplus production, in form of commodity-capital created from to the magnitude of surplus labour time directly and indirectly (living labour objectified in the elementary physical value-form of commodities) consumed %%[[GNBVIIP707L27]]%% in the production of those exchange-values, as a neccessary condition for the production of means of labour. 

In this sense, the development of the productive forces of knowledge by scientific development increases the productive power of labour as if it would be a separated force imposting the exploitation of the living labour force, by presenting the exchange-values in its monetary-form of price as a mass of exchange-values and use-values combining the circulating and fixed capital, the concrete human labour and the alien productive force of machines, under the same magnitude of value measured in relation to an standard of price divorced from the universal equivalent of value: labour time %%[[GNBVIIP709L32]]%%.

The fixed capital produced as means of labour, "add [exchange-value.] .[if] it increases the surplus-labour time" by employing the advance of science with the aim of creating a force of production which reduce the amount of neccessary labour time to the minimum required, allowing the appropiation of a greater magnitude of surplus labour as the source of surplus-value (s) ideally expressed in the price of the commodity-capital produced (C), as a quantity always over the cost price (k). %%[[GNBVIIP708L11]]%%.

The reduction of labour to the neccessary labour time increase the magnitude of surplus-labour time expressed in the price of the increased mass of commodities. Because the socially neccessary labour time is at the same time measure of exchange-value, as an ideal expression of its value inflated in the price of the commodities, while at the same time being reduced in its concrete elementary quantitative form, as concrete quantity of living labour objectified. %%[[GNBVIIP708L34]]%%. Furthermore, due to the consequential general inflation of the price of commodities, including the price of gold and the price of money; the quantitative reduction of the concrete labour employed in the production process given the most advanced level of labour productivity allowed by the increment of fixed capital in form of machines in the process of creation of surplus-value in its commodity-capital form, "forces the worker to work longer [...] than he himself did with the simplest, crudest tools" %%[[GNBVIIP709L1]]%%. As the reduction of the labour time is not followed by an increase of its cost price as the sum of the total of wages, because in that manner the surplus-labour would dimminish the magnitude of surplus-value captured as capital expressed by the rate of profit, would found another call to fall from the skybuildings of rocketed inflation.

2024-11-21 15:49 
The “full development of capital […] takes place”, when “capital has posited the mode of production corresponding to it”. How, or more interesting when capital reproduction dominated human reproduction? Marx will specify what he means by the form assumed by capital in its “full development”, as an initial condition described as the instance when the means of labour are introduced in the production process as fixed constant capital, as purchased commodities completely excluded from its appropriation for other aims rather than the production of profits for its owner. But, is precisely for that reason, that those means of labour as values are also constrained, “suspended in its immediate form” of use-values after being purchased by the capitalist (M-C). %%[[GNBVIIP609L1]]%%. As it is stated by Marx: “fixed capital […] is the part of capital which is locked into the production process” %%[[GNBVIIP710L24]]%%, but not only because of its physical qualities of durability in consumption %%[[GNBVIIP701L711]]%%, rather it is because its because the extended durability of its use-value that becomes means of production %%[[GNBVIIP711L6]]%%. Machinery as fixed capital, is different from the raw materials because the raw materials are consumed by the alien productive force of machines circulating smoothly in the production process, but instead, the means of labour can only being consumed during the production process as productive forces of value %%[[GNBVIIP710L24]]%%. Any interruption of the machine, obstructs totally the fixed capital conversion in circulating capital, as the machines are only producers of value if are in constant operation incrementing the labour power of living labour while subsuming its surplus-labour in the surplus-value resultant in the realization of the price of the mass of commodity-capital produced. In that sense, the means of labour became fixed capital, as are commodities under consumption, burning in their transformation process into the money-form of capital. The means of labour became fixed capital when purchased as commodities but are not consumed at the same velocity as human labour (variable capital). Holding their elementary form of use-values for a limited time, predictable in average, during its transformation process into money. So, considered as constant due to its fixed turn-over time in the production stage of the circuit of capital -but, not because of that reason exempt from social accidents as we will specify further. In this mode, capital opposes labour, dominating the production process also by subsuming the concrete “skillfulness of the worker” to a “technological application of science”, which requires only direct labour reduced to a “mere moment of this process”, to necessarily abstract labour time. In this relation, organic for capital reproduction, the quantity of labour depends on the requirements determined by the advancement of the production forces (science); given by the productivity of capital as the reduction of its variable part due to an increment of its constant part in its organic composition. This is resulting, contradictory, in a rising quantity of commodity-capital produced, that contains a diminished component of value embodied (“objectified labour”) in its money-form or price. “[L]labour time […] is posited by capital as the sole determinant […] of the creation of use-values” in the circulation process, it becomes the common element shared by all the commodities as universal measure of its exchange-values. Living labour reduced quantitatively to its average as a standardized smaller proportion, and qualitatively reduced to the indispensable activity subordinated to the technical composition of capital, given by a certain social combination of labour and capital. The capital composited in social combination “appears as a natural fruit of social labour”, “although it is a historic product” of the methods of accelerated accumulation, which are the methods of primitive accumulation, extended dispossession of the peasantry and indigenous as a sine qua non condition for the appropriation of its means of labour and of gold and silver: the alienable form of indigenous wealth correspondent to the development of merchant capital, as commodities for exchange or hoarding. %%[[GNBVIIP700L4]]%% The subsumption of the “forces of nature” of the scientific process of labour, shaped it “as a quality of fixed capital in contrast to living labour”. Appropriated in the scientific process of capital production, individual labour becomes productive as labour -socially- exchanged as an ideally measured average of necessary labour time “represented by and concentrated in capital”. So, labour, as the common element of universal equivalence between commodities, also determines the magnitude of their exchange-value as commodity-capital threw to circulation. Furthermore, the “worker’s ability” to exchange is due to its circulation as capital, this means, because his exchange, as the appropriation of its product equal to a portion of the (variable component of) total capital advanced, is mediated by its transformation into commodity. Then the consumption of energy substances for their own reproduction as living labour, depends on its participation in the exchange process as wage-owners, as all the process of use-values exchange is mediated by money in the circuit of capital. %%[[GNBVIIP700L14]]%% “Capital in the form of circulating capital posits itself as mediator between the different workers” . %%[[GBVIIP701L13]]%%. As means of labour, fixed capital increases the value of the commodities produced only if those are use-values product of human labour, and insofar as its increment in the composition of capital increases the ratio between surplus labour and socially necessary labour time by rising its productivity creating a larger quantity of commodities..%%[[GNBVIIP701L16]]%% Step forward, Marx wrote: “required for the maintenance of living labour capacity in a shorter time”. This last statement could be identified as a discontinuity among the 1854 Notebooks of Marx compilated in the publication labeled as Grundrisse, and his late Economic Manuscripts of 1864-1865. As the reproduction of capital is not oriented to produce the required use-values to maintain the living labour capacity in a shorter time, but to the maximization of the rate of profit. As the portion of surplus value captured into profit after the consumption of a certain amount of total capital advanced (k) as productive capital. The lived illusion of the proletarians imagining being socially reproduced by capital is a burgher delirium, which not only negated the dictatorship of capital subsuming labour, but also the militarism with which the reproduction of capital operates using the perfectioned methods of primitive accumulation. Its antagonism is totally expressed with the annihilation of the class in struggle, of the living labour raised in revolt. The productivity of labour operates increasing the proportion of capital that employs machinery, reducing only to the minimum total amount of labour necessary “to realize a maximum of labour in the maximum number of such objects” %%[[GNBVIIP701L33]]%%. If we follow Marx reference to fixed capital as capital constituted “as a product of labour and of alien labour merely appropriated [purchased or dispossessed] by capital”. This imply the posit of the minimum amount of necessary labour time enough to being exchange-values with value, objectified living labour embodied in the maximum quantity of commodities possible to produce under: i) determined technical composition of fixed capital (expressed in the quantitative magnitudes of living labour time and of the other products of nature and labour) given by an specific stage of development of the production forces; and ii) by the organic composition expressed by the relation within the total capital advanced as cost price (k) between the total capital advanced for wages as variable capital, and the constant capital advanced for the purchase of the products of alien labour appropriated as raw materials, instruments, and means of production. Thrown as fixed productive capital to the circulation process during a specific turn-over time, for the sole aim of its reproduction as an augmented quantity of money captured as profit. %%[[gnbviip701l30]]%% The increased productive force of labour or productivity of labour expresses the increase of an alien force of production outside itself, and the diminishment of its labour’ s forces to the minimum necessary. Appearing as a process which is benevolently augmenting the free time of the workers, doing with velocity what labour cannot do solely with their own force, while replacing the workers’ force with machinery force in the production of capital. It’s important to recognize here that the increment of the constant capital results necessarily in the diminishment of its variable component, as the total capital advanced as the total cost price of production (k) is composed by the sum of the variable capital advanced in the money-form of wages (v) and the constant capital advanced (c). When the magnitude of constant capital is equal to the cost price declared by the capitalist as the imaginary equivalent of the money-form of value of all the use-values appropriated by capital production, distinct from living human labour, able to being declared as a constant magnitude for a determined turn-over time (k=v+c; >c|<v). The increment of c result in a diminishment of v, and consequently in a reduction of the proportion of surplus-value transformed into profit, as the difference between the rate of profit (p’) and the rate of surplus value (s’) is equal to the total surplus-value extracted from the total variable capital advanced (s/v), minus the total augmented money captured while completed the circuit of the total capital advanced by including the discount of the total constant capital consumed slower than its counter variable part (s/v+c; s/k). %%[[GNBVIIP702L18]]%% The separation of capital between means of labour, raw materials, and the commodities produced, are converted into two different forms of capital: the means of labour delay its consumption in the production process holding its elementary form as use-values for a determined amount of turn-over times, introduced in the circuit of capital reproduction as capital fixed as capital that don’t turn-over with the same velocity than the circulating capital composed by that mass of commodity-capital ready for circulation and the raw materials, the products of nature without which, as well as without human labour productive capacity, the reproduction process of capital isn’t’ possible. The fixed capital becomes the constant capital advanced in means of labour as use-values being amassed in the price of the resultant mass of commodity-capital produced by a certain amount of capital advanced in a certain amount of time. The velocity of fixed capital is lower than the velocity of circulating capital, because the metamorphosis of a use-value into another exchange-value mediated by the production process, as productive capital, requires the material consumption of the means of labour which due to the living necessities of the mass of living labour, occur with a different velocity. %%[[GNBVIIP703L1]]%%. Indeed, fixed capital within the production process increases the “length of circulation time”. Resulting in the “decrease of the surplus-value which could be created in a given period of time without […] interruptions”. Anticipating his latest work in the transformation of surplus value into profit strongly modified in Engels’ edition of Volume 3 of Capital, compared with the delayed publication of the corresponding original section of Marx’s Economic Manuscrits of 1864-1865. Marx, earlier, in the Grundrisse specified two mechanisms by which the incremental magnitude of fixed capital, physically determined by its elementary use-value form as machines employed in the production process. Indeed, fixed capital in form of means of labour are neccessarily the result of alien labour advanced as source of value during its previous specific production. So on, its “value [as] fixed capital is reproduced only in so far as it is used up in the production process” %%[[GNBVIIP703L30]]%%. The metamorfosis of commodity-capital into augmented money-capital mediated by production, configures the circuit of capital reproduction, the transformation of fixed capital into circulating capital in constant flow is the determinant condition of capital reproduction. Given that in the production process fixed capital is operating only in so far is constant capital, machinery only producing value when is being used. Their use depends completely on the raw materials as source of energy, and the living labour minimally required for their operation. Only when the machines are operating with uninterrupted continuity -as constant capital-, constantly in the production process, can fixed capital be transformed into productive capital. The reason is because the “flow of reproduction” “becomes an externally compelling” force “outside”, but neccessarily conditioned by, living labour and nature. %%[[GNBVIIP703L33]]%% Fixed capital, depending on its velocity of circulation can be or not continuously creating value with incremental returns to the pocket of the capitalists, only until a point in which the growth of fixed capital in proportion to the general growth of capital (k) reached an scale in which, due to the antisystemic impact of the interruptions, that by social accidents, “act as a direct reduction [force] of capital itself, of its initial value” %%[[GNBVIIP703L29]]%%. Is critical to understand that the reason because those interruptions to the circulation of fixed capital decrease the rate of profit (p’), as the proportion of “surplus-value which could be created in a given period of time” from “the quantity of total circulating capital (k)” continuously engaged in the production process” (p’=s/k). Is because of the scale and proportion in which fixed capital composed the total capital advanced for circulation given a certain amount of time, until an actual point in which the large industry developed by and for capital reproduction, initiated its antagonic metabolism, its constant fall in the rate of profit, a dynamic of decreasing returns hidden by inflation and monetarization, multiplication of monetized-capital, inorganic capital as money not anymore oriented to the creation of value. Because, if the total circulating capital is the sum of the cost price given by the total living labour quantifyed by the total price of wages and the total price of the constant capital composed by the fixed capital posited in their machine-use-value form and the raw materials appropiated in the process of commodity-capital production. And its first, pressupossed that certain quantity of minimum labour is required neccessarily for any production process. So, the minimum amount of variable capital, as the cost price of living labour time consumed, is always greater than cero (v>0). But that is not the case of fixed capital, counted as constant capital (c) in the composition of the total capital advanced for circulation. The reduction of labour time to its minimum neccessary, resultant from the increment of the productivity of labour by the technological development introduction of the powerfull efectiveness of machines as means of labour. Labour ceases to be the source of value or determinant of value in the production process of commodity-capital, as the increment of the sperfluous form of its value embodied in the commodity-capital produced expressed in its price, becames a condition of the mode of production or branchs of production characterized by the advanced development of labour productivity, due that the increment of money-capital depends, given the reduction of variable capital to the minimum neccesary cost price of wages, inflation of the commodity prices, its increment moves in antagonic direction to the maximum decrease of human labour time in the production process. Without this inflation, the fall in the rate of profit, due to an increment of the fixed capital posited in the powerfull efectiveness of machines as means of labour and the consequent reduction of the neccessary labour time to the minimum amount possible, will be expressed in the fall of the price of money, which is being rised symetrically with the price of commodities “to mantain the already created value as value” %%[[GNBVIIP706L8]]%%. Price, or money form of value, is measured in money and gold only insofar are related to the imagined quantity of human labour fictiously expressed in the standard of price. Furthermore, the rise of the commodities prices involve an increment in the quantity of money as mean of payment, accompanying the rise of the price of gold and money, but also increases the price of the commodities purchased as raw materials and means of labour, so on increasing the cost price of the fixed capital intervining in the production process. After reaching the point of scientific development, a large mass of machines appears as the wealth of burgeoisies societies, large industry, large scientific progress, larger the mass of machines (c=>0|v>0; <v|>c). Any argument in favor of automation, can be rised in this particular point of time, but one fact holds: any knowed human technology have solutioned the impossibility of supplying energy to an alien force of appropriation (machine productive force) not only without any human regulation, but without sourcing the machine with energy supplies only possible to be provided always in certain degree by living labour. Indeed, greater the impact of interruptions to the naturally delayed pace of circulation, the slow burn consumption of pricefull advanced and huge mass of machines, which if not used becomes not only a mass of commodities decorating the wealth of burgeoisie societies, but inorganic capital, fixed capital incapable of circulation, left out of circulation, interrupted, obstructed. In the dystopian future in which capital reproduces itself, the appropiation of the products and forces of nature could be directly appropiated by the machines, without any human mediation, liberating its productive forces from human living labour, machines appropiates directly and unmediated their energy supplies from nature. If it exists, would be an organic capital for machines reproduction in which humanity only can hold its existence as a source of energy, capital reproduction tends to a complete inorganic relation with humans, as capital relation with nature, antagonic, inorganic, a merely alienable source of wealth. What before was variable capital or the cost price of the total labour time employed in the production process during a certain period, is replaced or extinguished, by the use-values that were means of labour, becomes the elementary form of value production force by subsuming human labour time for machine labour time or applying its equivalency or transformation (k=c+v; if v=0 so c->v). If machines are only machines, and don’t create classes, and in that sense are nothing more than machines in a bag of machines, then only distribution but not exchange is required, as there is no individual neccesities nor appropiation, but the energy supply perfect distribution possible to extract from nature, so no exchange as there are not different neccessities there is not different use-values to exchange, as the neccessities of a pure machine force of production is centralized and concentrated for the most efficient direct distribution of the energy supplied by the products and forces of nature. If the “ultimate development of the value-relation and of production resting on value” is the contradictory relation between capital subordinating labour by the mediation of money (L-M-C). In any case organic capital is inorganic nature, but organic nature is not anymore organic capital, as it is nature left ouf of capital production of value, it is outside the appropriation “process of nature” as an “industrial process” of production %%[[GNBVIIP705L17]]%%. “[N]atural material [being] transformed into organs of the human will over nature”, “organs of the human brain, created by the human hand”; “the power of knowledge, objectified”, proudfully “the general social knowledge” %%[[GNBVIIP706L30]]%% created its materiality in the transformation of machines in a direct force of production. In the paragraphs quoted above, Marx appeared to be in a breaking romance with science as the development of technical reason for the mastery of nature, for the appropiation of nature, as it rises its effectivity by the increasing intervention of the means of labour which requiere only a minumum neccessary amount of human labour for its energy supply and operation. At that moment, Marx appear to think in the development of scientific knowledge as condition for the extended productivity of the value creation forces, in a perpetual mastering of human over nature, as if the subordination of living labour to the reproduction of capital would dissapear with the cancellation of surplus labour as source of surplus value, while the mere appropiation of nature as capital, this is nature transformed in organic capital, is always inorganic nature, if its consumption as use-values acquired by production or by money, as capital for the production of commodity-capital, becomes inorganic capital, as it stop to produce value. The capital produced in this conditions of fall of the profit rates and general inflation of the price of commodities and the price of money and gold, maximizes the quantity and price of monetized-capital, minimizing its value. So the capital is inorganic if its transformation stopped to be a metamorfosis of value, if the production of value is considered yet necessarily dependent on living labour force for the creation of use-values which exchange was directed to the satisfaction of human needs for social reproduction. A “level of productivity” enough developed to reduce the labour time to the minimum neccessary, had been produced a capital overaccumulation, in a “level directly related to the [magnitude of value created by the] transformation of circulating capital into fixed capital” %%[[GNBVIIP707L24]]%%. The corresponding level of productivity should have been reached surplus production, in form of commodity-capital created from to the magnitude of surplus labour time directly and indirectly (living labour objectified in the elementary physical value-form of commodities) consumed %%[[GNBVIIP707L27]]%% in the production of those exchange-values, as a neccessary condition for the production of means of labour. In this sense, the development of the productive forces of knowledge by scientific development increases the productive power of labour as if it would be a separated force imposting the exploitation of the living labour force, by presenting the exchange-values in its monetary-form of price as a mass of exchange-values and use-values combining the circulating and fixed capital, the concrete human labour and the alien productive force of machines, under the same magnitude of value measured in relation to an standard of price divorced from the universal equivalent of value: labour time %%[[GNBVIIP709L32]]%%. Marcuse reference to the automation of production as a consequence of labour productivity, specify the tendency of fixed capital in the form of machines as appearing to replace the magnitude of value posited by the living labour, as if it is would be a force of production by its own, “toward the point where productivity is determined “by the machines, and not by the induvial output”” %%[[GNBVIIP28L21]]%%. The fixed capital produced as means of labour, “add [exchange-value.] .[if] it increases the surplus-labour time” by employing the advance of science with the aim of creating a force of production which reduce the amount of neccessary labour time to the minimum required, allowing the appropiation of a greater magnitude of surplus labour as the source of surplus-value (s) ideally expressed in the price of the commodity-capital produced (C), as a quantity always over the cost price (k). %%[[GNBVIIP708L11]]%%. Marcuse also noted the quantitative change on the rising proportion of “white-collar workers” in comparison with the reduction of the “blue-collar workers” (red-neck?) as well as the surplus labour reserve of unemployed workers %%[[GNBVIIP27L7]]%%. The reduction of labour to the necessary labour time increases the magnitude of surplus-labour time expressed in the price of the increased mass of commodities. Because the socially neccessary labour time is at the same time measure of exchange-value, as an ideal expression of its value inflated in the price of the commodities, while at the same time being reduced in its concrete elementary quantitative form, as concrete quantity of living labour objectified. %%[[GNBVIIP708L34]]%%. Furthermore, due to the consequential general inflation of the price of commodities, including the price of gold and the price of money; the quantitative reduction of the concrete labour employed in the production process given the most advanced level of labour productivity allowed by the increment of fixed capital in form of machines in the process of creation of surplus-value in its commodity-capital form, “forces the worker to work longer […] than he himself did with the simplest, crudest tools” %%[[GNBVIIP709L1]]%%. As the reduction of the labour time is not followed by an increase of its cost price as the sum of the total of wages, because in that manner the surplus-labour would dimminish the magnitude of surplus-value captured as capital expressed by the rate of profit, would found another call to fall from the skybuildings of rocketed inflation.