---
created: 2024-11-20T08:28:12 (UTC -08:00)
tags: [Lenin,Bolsheviks,Russian Revolution,Communism]
source: https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1922/nov/20.htm
author: Vladimir Lenin
---

# Speech At A Plenary Session The Moscow Soviet

> ## Excerpt
> Written: 21 November 1922 
First Published: PravdaNo. 263,; November 21, 1922; Published according to the Pravdatext checked with the verbatim report 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 2nd English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 33, pages 435-443
Translated: David Skvirsky and George Hanna
Transcription\HTML Markup: 
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

---
## V. I. Lenin

### Speech At A Plenary Session Of

#### November 20, 1922

___

Written: 21 November 1922  
First Published: _Pravda_No. 263,; November 21, 1922; Published according to the _Pravda_text checked with the verbatim report  
Source: Lenin’s [_Collected Works_](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/cw/index.htm), 2nd English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, [Volume 33](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/cw/volume33.htm), pages 435-443  
Translated: David Skvirsky and George Hanna  
Transcription\\HTML Markup: [David Walters](https://www.marxists.org/admin/volunteers/biographies/walters.htm) & [R. Cymbala](https://www.marxists.org/admin/volunteers/biographies/rcymbala.htm)  
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the [GNU Free Documentation License](https://www.marxists.org/admin/legal/fdl.htm)

___

(_Stormy applause. [“The Internationale”](https://www.marxists.org/history/etol/inter.mp3) is sung._ ) Comrades, I regret very much and apologise that I have been unable to come to your session earlier. As far as I know you intended a few weeks ago to give me an opportunity of attending the Moscow Soviet. I could not come because after my illness, from December onwards, I was incapacitated, to use the professional term, for quite a long time, and because of this reduced ability to work had to postpone my present address from week to week. A very considerable portion of my work which, as you will remember, I had first piled on Comrade Tsyurupa, and then on Comrade Rykov, I also had to pile additionally on Comrade Kamenev. And I must say that, to employ a simile I have already used, he was suddenly burdened with two loads. Though, to continue the simile, it should be said that the horse has proved to be an exceptionally capable and zealous one. (_Applause._) All the same, however, nobody is supposed to drag two loads, and I am now waiting impatiently for Comrades Tsyurupa and Rykov to return, and we shall divide up the work at least a little more fairly. As for myself, in view of my reduced ability to work it takes me much more time to look into matters than I should like.

In December 1921, when I had to stop working altogether, it was the year’s end. We were effecting the transition to the New Economic Policy, and it turned out already then that, although we had embarked upon this transition in the beginning of 1921, it was quite a difficult, I would say a very difficult, transition. We have now been effecting this transition for more than eighteen months, and one would think that it was time the majority took up new places and disposed themselves according to the new conditions, particularly those of the New Economic Policy.

As to foreign policy, we had the fewest changes in that field. We pursued the line that we had adopted earlier, and I think I can say with a clear conscience that we pursued it quite consistently and with enormous success. There is no need, I think, to deal with that in detail; the capture of Vladivostok, the ensuing demonstration and the declaration of federation which you read in the press[<sup>[2]</sup>](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1922/nov/20.htm#fw02)the other day have proved and shown with the utmost clarity that no changes are necessary in this respect. The road we are on is absolutely clearly and well defined, and has ensured us success in face of all the countries of the world, although some of them are still prepared to declare that they refuse to sit at one table with us. Nevertheless, economic relations, followed by diplomatic relations, are improving, must improve, and certainly will improve. Every country which resists this risks being late, and, perhaps in some quite substantial things, it risks being at a disadvantage. All of us see this now, and not only from the press, from the newspapers. I think that in their trips abroad comrades are also finding the changes very great. In that respect, to use an old simile, we have not changed to other trains, or to other conveyances.

But as regards our home policy, the change we made in the spring of 1921, which was necessitated by such extremely powerful and convincing circumstances that no debates or disagreements arose among us about it—that change continues to cause us some difficulties, great difficulties, I would say. Not because we have any doubts about the need for the turn—no doubts exist in that respect—not because we have any doubts as to whether the test of our New Economic Policy has yielded the successes we expected. No doubts exist on that score—I can say this quite definitely—either in the ranks of our Party or in the ranks of the huge mass of non-Party workers and peasants.

In this sense the problem presents no difficulties. The difficulties we have stem from our being faced with a task whose solution very often requires the services of new people, extraordinary measures and extraordinary methods. Doubts still exist among us as to whether this or that is correct. There are changes in one direction or another. And it should be said that both will continue for quite a long time. “The New Economic Policy!” A strange title. It was called a New Economic Policy because it turned things back. We are now retreating, going back, as it were; but we are doing so in order, after first retreating, to take a running start and make a bigger leap forward. It was on this condition alone that we retreated in pursuing our New Economic Policy. Where and how we must now regroup, adapt and reorganise in order to start a most stubborn offensive after our retreat, we do not yet know. To carry out all these operations properly we need, as the proverb says, to look not ten but a hundred times before we leap. We must do so in order to cope with the incredible difficulties we encounter in dealing with all our tasks and problems. You know perfectly well what sacrifices have been made to achieve what has been achieved; you know how long the Civil War has dragged on and what effort it has cost. Well now, the capture of Vladivostok has shown all of us (though Vladivostok is a long way off, it is after all one of our own towns) (_prolonged applause_ ) everybody’s desire to join us, to join in our achievements. The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic now stretches from here to there. This desire has rid us both of our civil enemies and of the foreign enemies who attacked us. I am referring to Japan.

We have won quite a definite diplomatic position, recognised by the whole world. All of you see it. You see its results, but how much time we needed to get it! We have now won the recognition of our rights by our enemies both in economic and in commercial policy. This is proved by the conclusion of trade agreements.

We can see why we, who eighteen months ago took the path of the so-called New Economic Policy, are finding it so incredibly difficult to advance along that path. We live in a country devastated so severely by war, knocked out of anything like the normal course of life, in a country that has suffered and endured so much, that willy-nilly we are beginning all our calculations with a very, very small percentage—the pre-war percentage. We apply this yardstick to the conditions of our life, we sometimes do so very impatiently, heatedly, and always end up with the conviction that the difficulties are vast. The task we have set ourselves in this field seems all the more vast because we are comparing it with the state of affairs in any ordinary bourgeois country. We have set ourselves this task because we understood that it was no use expecting the wealthy powers to give us the assistance usually forthcoming under such circumstances.[<sup>[3]</sup>](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1922/nov/20.htm#fw03) After the Civil War we have been subjected to very nearly a boycott, that is, we have been told that the economic ties that are customary and normal in the capitalist world will not be maintained in our case.

Over eighteen months have passed since we undertook the New Economic Policy, and even a longer period has passed since we concluded our first international treaty. Nonetheless, this boycott of us by all the bourgeoisie and all governments continues to be felt. We could not count on anything else when we adopted the new economic conditions; yet we had no doubt that we had to make the change and achieve success single-handed. The further we go, the clearer it becomes that any aid that may be rendered to us, that will be rendered to us by the capitalist powers, will, far from eliminating this condition, in all likelihood and in the overwhelming majority of cases intensify it, accentuate it still further. “Single-handed”—we told ourselves. “Single-handed”—we are told by almost every capitalist country with which we have concluded any deals, with which we have undertaken any engagements, with which we have begun any negotiations. And that is where the special difficulty lies. We must realise this difficulty. We have built up our own political system in more than three years of work, incredibly hard work that was incredibly full of heroism. In the position in which we were till now we had no time to see whether we would smash something needlessly, no time to see whether there would be many sacrifices, because there were sacrifices enough, because the struggle which we then began (you know this perfectly well and there is no need to dwell on it) was a life-and-death struggle against the old social system, against which we fought to forge for ourselves a right to existence, to peaceful development. And we have won it. It is not we who say this, it is not the testimony of witnesses who may be accused of being partial to us. It is the testimony of witnesses who are in the camp of our enemies and who are naturally partial—not in our favour, however, but against us. These witnesses were in Denikin’s camp. They directed the occupation. And we know that their partiality cost us very dear, cost us colossal destruction. We suffered all sorts of losses on their account, and lost values of all kinds, including the greatest of all values—human lives—on an incredibly large scale. Now we must scrutinise our tasks most carefully and understand that the main task will be not to give up our previous gains. We shall not give up a single one of our old gains. (_Applause._ ) Yet we are also faced with an entirely new task; the old may prove a downright obstacle. To understand this task is most difficult. Yet it must be understood, so that we may learn how to work when, so to speak, it is necessary to turn ourselves inside out. I think, comrades, that these words and slogans are understandable, because for nearly a year, during my enforced absence, you have had in practice, handling the jobs on hand, to speak and think of this in various ways and on hundreds of occasions, and I am confident that your reflections on that score can only lead to one conclusion, namely, that today we must display still more of the flexibility which we employed till now in the Civil War.

We must not abandon the old. The series of concessions that adapt us to the capitalist powers is a series of concessions that enables them to make contact with us, ensures them a profit which is sometimes bigger, perhaps, than it should be. At the same time, we are conceding but a little part of the means of production, which are held almost entirely by our state. The other day the papers discussed the concession proposed by the Englishman Urquhart, who has hitherto been against us almost throughout the Civil War. He used to say: “We shall achieve our aim in the Civil War against Russia, against the Russia that has dared to deprive us of this and of that.” And after all that we had to enter into negotiations with him. We did not refuse them, we undertook them with the greatest joy, but we said: “Beg your pardon, but we shall not give up what we have won. Our Russia is so big, our economic potentialities are so numerous, and we feel justified in not rejecting your kind proposal, but we shall discuss it soberly, like businessmen.” True, nothing came of our first talk, because we could not agree to his proposal for political reasons. We had to reject it. So long as the British did not entertain the possibility of our participating in the negotiations on the Straits, the Dardanelles, we had to reject it, but right after doing so we had to start examining the matter in substance. We discussed whether or not it was of advantage to us, whether we would profit from concluding this concession agreement, and if so, under what circumstances it would be profitable. We had to talk about the price. That, comrades, is what shows you clearly how much our present approach to problems should differ from our former approach. Formerly the Communist said: “I give my life", and it seemed very simple to him, although it was not always so simple. Now, however, we Communists face quite another task. We must now take all things into account, and each of you must learn to be prudent. We must calculate how, in the capitalist environment, we can ensure our existence, how we can profit by our enemies, who, of course, will bargain, who have never forgotten how to bargain and will bargain at our expense. We are not forgetting that either, and do not in the least imagine commercial people anywhere turning into lambs and, having turned into lambs, offering us blessings of all sorts for nothing. That does not happen, and we do not expect it, but count on the fact that we, who are accustomed to putting up a fight, will find a way out and prove capable of trading, and profiting, and emerging safely from difficult economic situations. That is a very difficult task. That is the task we are working on now. I should like us to realise clearly how great is the abyss between the old and the new tasks. However great the abyss may be, we learned to manoeuvre during the war, and we must understand that the manoeuvre we now have to perform, in the midst of which we now are, is the most difficult one. But then it seems to be our last manoeuvre. We must test our strength in this field and prove that we have learned more than just the lessons of yesterday and do not just keep repeating the fundamentals. Nothing of the kind. We have begun to relearn, and shall relearn in such a way that we shall achieve definite and obvious success. And it is for the sake of this relearning, I think, that we must again firmly promise one another that under the name of the New Economic Policy we have turned back, but turned back in such a way as to surrender nothing of the new, and yet to give the capitalists such advantages as will compel any state, however hostile to us, to establish contacts and to deal with us. Comrade Krasin, who has had many talks with Urquhart, the head and backbone of the whole intervention, said that Urquhart, after all his attempts to foist the old system on us at all costs, throughout Russia, seated himself at the same table with him, with Krasin, and began asking: “What’s the price? How much? For how many years?” (_Applause._) This is still quite far from our concluding concession deals and thus entering into treaty relations that are perfectly precise and binding—from the viewpoint of bourgeois society—but we can already see that we are coming to it, have nearly come to it, but have not quite arrived. We must admit that, comrades, and not be swell-headed. We are still far from having fully achieved the things that will make us strong, self-reliant and calmly confident that no capitalist deals can frighten us, calmly confident that however difficult a deal may be we shall conclude it, we shall get to the bottom of it and settle it. That is why the work—both political and Party—that we have begun in this sphere must be continued, and that is why we must change from the old methods to entirely new ones.

We still have the old machinery, and our task now is to remould it along new lines. We cannot do so at once, but we must see to it that the Communists we have are properly placed. What we need is that they, the Communists, should control the machinery they are assigned to, and not, as so often happens with us, that the machinery should control them. We should make no secret of it, and speak of it frankly. Such are the tasks and the difficulties that confront us—and that at a moment when we have set out on our practical path, when we must not approach socialism as if it were an icon painted in festive colours. We need to take the right direction, we need to see that everything is checked, that the masses, the entire population, check the path we follow and say: “Yes, this is better than the old system.” That is the task we have set ourselves. Our Party, a little group of people in comparison with the country’s total population, has tackled this job. This tiny nucleus has set itself the task of remaking everything, and it will do so. We have proved that this is no utopia but a cause which people live by. We have all seen this. This has already been done. We must remake things in such a way that the great majority of the masses, the peasants and workers, will say: “It is not you who praise yourselves, but we. We say that you have achieved splendid results, after which no intelligent person will ever dream of returning to the old.” We have not reached that point yet. _That is why NEP remains the main_, _current_, _and all embracing slogan of today._We shall not forget a single one of the slogans we learned yesterday. We can say that quite calmly, without the slightest hesitation, say it to anybody, and every step we take demonstrates it. But we still have to adapt ourselves to the New Economic Policy. We must know how to overcome, to reduce to a definite minimum all its negative features, which there is no need to enumerate and which you know perfectly well. We must know how to arrange everything shrewdly. Our legislation gives us every opportunity to do so. Shall we be able to get things going properly? That is still-far from being settled. We are making a study of things. Every issue of our Party newspaper offers you a dozen articles which tell you that at such-and-such a factory, owned by so-and-so, the rental terms are such-and-such, whereas at another, where our Communist comrade is the manager, the terms are such-and-such. Does it yield a profit or not, does it pay its way or not? We have approached the very core of the everyday problems, and that is a tremendous achievement. Socialism is no longer a matter of the distant future, or an abstract picture, or an icon. Our opinion of icons is the same—a very bad one. We have brought socialism into everyday life and must here see how matters stand. That is the task of our day, the task of our epoch. Permit me to conclude by expressing confidence that difficult as this task may be, new as it may be compared with our previous task, and numerous as the difficulties may be that it entails, we shall all—not in a day, but in a few years—all of us together fulfil it whatever the cost, so that NEP Russia will become socialist Russia. (_Stormy_, _prolonged applause._)

___

### Endnotes

[\[1\]](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1922/nov/20.htm#bk01) Lenin spoke at the Plenary Meeting of the Moscow Soviet, which held a joint sitting with all the district Soviets in Moscow, in the evening of November 20,1922. This was his last public speech.

[\[2\]](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1922/nov/20.htm#bk02) The decision adopted by the People’s Assembly of the Far Eastern Republic on November 14, 1922, to join the R.S.F.S.R. This decision was published on November 15, 1922. The full text of the decision was published in the newspapers on November 21, 1922, after Lenin had made his speech.

[\[3\]](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1922/nov/20.htm#bk03) In the verbatim report the text reads further: “and that even if we took into consideration the extremely high, say such-and-such a rate of interest, that is imposed in these circumstances on a country that, to use the accepted term, is rendered aid. Properly speaking, these rates of interest are very far from being aid. To put it bluntly, they would deserve a far less polite term than the word aid, but even these usual conditions would have been onerous for us.”

___

ESP

Camaradas, lamento mucho y pido disculpas por no haber podido asistir antes a su sesión. Por lo que sé, hace unas semanas tenía la intención de darme la oportunidad de asistir al Soviet de Moscú, no pude asistir porque, después de mi enfermedad a partir de diciembre, estuve incapacitado para usar el término profesional durante bastante tiempo y, debido a esta capacidad reducida para trabajar, tuve que posponer mi Una parte muy considerable de mi trabajo, que, como recordará, había amontonado primero sobre el camarada Tsyurupa y luego sobre el camarada Rykov, también tuve que amontonar adicionalmente sobre el camarada Kámenev. Y debo decir que, para emplear un símil que ya he utilizado, de repente se vio cargado con dos cargas. Aunque, para continuar con el símil, hay que decir que el caballo ha demostrado ser Aplausos, sin embargo, se supone que nadie debe arrastrar dos cargas, y ahora espero con impaciencia que regresen los camaradas Tsyurupa y Rykov, y dividiremos el trabajo al menos un poco más equitativamente. En cuanto a mí, en vista de mi reducida capacidad para trabajar, me lleva mucho más tiempo del que me gustaría examinar las cosas En diciembre de 1921, cuando tuve que dejar de trabajar por completo, era el fin de año. Estábamos llevando a cabo la transición a la Nueva Política Económica, y resultó ya entonces que, aunque nos habíamos embarcado en esta transición a principios de 1921, era bastante difícil, yo diría que una transición muy difícil. Hemos estado efectuando esta transición durante más de dieciocho meses, y uno pensaría que ya era hora de que la mayoría ocupara nuevos puestos y se dispusiera de acuerdo con las nuevas condiciones, en particular las de la Nueva Política Económica. En cuanto a la política exterior, hemos tenido el menor número de cambios en ese campo: Seguimos la línea que habíamos adoptado antes, y creo que puedo decir con la conciencia tranquila que la hemos seguido de manera bastante coherente y con un éxito enorme. No es necesario, creo, tratar eso en detalle: la captura de Vladivostok, la manifestación subsiguiente y la declaración de federación que se lee en la prensa. Archivo de la ORG: Obras Lenin, 1922, 20 de noviembre, htm fw02 el otro día han demostrado y demostrado con la mayor claridad que no son necesarios cambios a este respecto. El camino en el que estamos está absolutamente claro y bien definido, y nos ha asegurado el éxito frente a todos los países del mundo, aunque algunos de ellos todavía están dispuestos a declarar que se niegan a sentarse en una mesa con nosotros, sin embargo, las relaciones económicas seguido por las relaciones diplomáticas están mejorando, deben mejorar y sin duda mejorarán. Cada país que se resiste a esto corre el riesgo de llegar tarde y tal vez en algunas cosas bastante sustanciales corre el riesgo de estar en desventaja Todos nosotros vemos esto ahora y no solo por la prensa, por los periódicos, creo que en sus viajes al extranjero, los camaradas también están encontrando los cambios muy grandes En ese sentido, para usar un viejo símil, no hemos cambiado a otros trenes o a otros medios de transporte Pero en lo que se refiere a nuestra política interior, el cambio que hicimos en la primavera de 1921, que fue necesario por circunstancias tan poderosas y convincentes que no surgieron debates o desacuerdos entre nosotros al respecto, ese cambio sigue causándonos algunas dificultades, grandes dificultades, diría yo; No porque tengamos dudas sobre la necesidad del giro; no hay dudas a ese respecto; no porque tengamos dudas sobre si la prueba de nuestra nueva política económica ha dado los éxitos que esperábamos. No hay dudas al respecto. Lo puedo decir con toda claridad, ya sea en las filas de nuestro Partido o en las filas de la enorme masa de obreros y campesinos sin partido En este sentido, el problema no presenta dificultades. Las dificultades que tenemos se derivan de que nos enfrentamos a una tarea cuya solución requiere muy a menudo los servicios de personas nuevas, medidas extraordinarias y métodos extraordinarios. Todavía existen dudas entre nosotros sobre si esto o aquello es correcto. Hay cambios en una dirección u otra. Y hay que decir que ambos continuarán durante bastante tiempo. La nueva política económica: A Extraño título: Se le llamó Nueva Política Económica porque hizo retroceder las cosas. Ahora nos estamos retirando, retrocediendo, por así decirlo, pero lo estamos haciendo con el fin de Después de retirarnos primero, para comenzar a correr y dar un salto más grande hacia adelante. Fue solo con esta condición que nos retiramos en la prosecución de nuestra Nueva Política Económica. ¿Dónde y cómo debemos ahora reagruparnos, adaptarnos y reorganizarnos para iniciar una vida más Ofensiva obstinada: Después de nuestra retirada, aún no lo sabemos: Para llevar a cabo todas estas operaciones correctamente, necesitamos, como dice el proverbio, mirar no diez, sino cien veces antes de saltar. Debemos hacerlo para hacer frente a las increíbles dificultades que encontramos al hacer frente a todas nuestras tareas y problemas. Ustedes saben perfectamente qué sacrificios se han hecho para lograr lo que se ha logrado, ustedes saben cuánto tiempo la guerra civil se ha prolongado y el esfuerzo que ha costado Pues bien, ahora la toma de Vladivostok nos ha demostrado a todos nosotros, aunque Vladivostok está muy lejos, después de todo, es una de nuestras ciudades Aplausos prolongados Deseo de todos de unirse a nosotros para unirse a nuestros logros La República Socialista Federativa Soviética Rusa se extiende ahora de aquí para allá Este deseo nos ha librado de nuestros enemigos civiles y de los enemigos extranjeros que nos atacaron, me refiero a Japón Hemos conquistado una posición diplomática bastante definida y reconocida por todo el mundo Todos ustedes lo ven Ustedes ven sus resultados, pero cuánto tiempo necesitábamos para conseguirlo Ahora hemos ganado el reconocimiento de nuestros derechos por parte de nuestros enemigos, tanto en la política económica como en la comercial Esto se demuestra con la celebración de acuerdos comerciales Podemos ver por qué nosotros, que hace dieciocho meses tomamos el camino de la llamada Nueva Política Económica, estamos encontrando tan increíblemente difícil avanzar por ese camino. Vivimos en un país devastado tan severamente por la guerra, fuera de todo lo que se parece al curso normal de la vida, en un país que ha sufrido y soportado tanto que, quiérase o no, estamos comenzando todos nuestros cálculos con un porcentaje muy, muy pequeño Aplicamos esta vara de medir a las condiciones de nuestra vida; A veces lo hacemos con mucha impaciencia, acaloradamente, y siempre terminamos con la convicción de que las dificultades son enormes; La tarea que nos hemos propuesto en este campo parece tanto más vasta cuanto que la comparamos con el estado de cosas en cualquier país burgués ordinario; Nos hemos propuesto esta tarea porque comprendimos que no era así. Esperemos que las potencias ricas nos brinden la ayuda que suele darse en tales circunstancias 3 https www marxists org archive lenin works 1922 nov 20 htm fw03 Después de la Guerra Civil hemos sido sometidos casi a un boicot, es decir, se nos ha dicho que los lazos económicos que son habituales y normales en el mundo capitalista no se mantendrán en nuestro caso Han pasado más de dieciocho meses desde que emprendimos la Nueva Política Económica, e incluso ha pasado un período más largo desde que firmamos nuestro primer tratado internacional. Sin embargo, este boicot contra nosotros por parte de toda la burguesía y de todos los gobiernos, se sigue sintiendo. No podíamos contar con otra cosa cuando adoptamos las nuevas condiciones económicas, pero no teníamos ninguna duda de que teníamos que hacer el cambio y lograr el éxito por nuestra cuenta. Vamos más claro se hace que cualquier ayuda que se nos pueda prestar, que nos sea prestada por las potencias capitalistas, estará lejos de eliminar esta condición con toda probabilidad, y en la inmensa mayoría de los casos la intensificará, la acentuará aún más. compromisos con los que hemos iniciado negociaciones Y ahí es donde radica la dificultad especial Debemos darnos cuenta de esta dificultad Hemos construido nuestro propio sistema político en más de tres años de trabajo increíblemente duro, trabajo que estuvo increíblemente lleno de heroísmo En la posición en la que nos encontrábamos hasta ahora, no teníamos tiempo para ver si íbamos a destrozar algo innecesariamente, no teníamos tiempo para ver si habría muchos sacrificios, porque hubo sacrificios suficientes, porque la lucha que entonces comenzamos, ustedes lo saben perfectamente y no hay necesidad de detenerse en ello, fue una lucha a vida o muerte contra el viejo sistema social contra el que luchamos para forjarnos un derecho a la existencia, al desarrollo pacífico Y lo hemos ganado. No somos nosotros los que decimos esto, no es el testimonio de los testigos. acusado de ser parcial con nosotros. Es el testimonio de testigos que están en el campo de nuestros enemigos, y que naturalmente son parciales, pero no a nuestro favor, sino en nuestra contra. Estos testigos estaban en el campo de Denikin. Ellos dirigieron la ocupación. Y sabemos que su parcialidad nos costó muy caro, nos costó una destrucción colosal. Sufrimos toda clase de pérdidas por su culpa, y perdimos valores de todo tipo, incluida la el más grande de todos los valores, vidas humanas a una escala increíblemente grande Ahora debemos examinar nuestras tareas con el mayor cuidado y comprender que la tarea principal será no renunciar a nuestros logros anteriores No renunciaremos a ni uno solo de nuestros antiguos logros Aplausos Sin embargo, también nos enfrentamos a una tarea completamente nueva: la vieja puede resultar un verdadero obstáculo Comprender esta tarea es muy difícil, sin embargo, debe ser entendido para que aprendamos a trabajar cuando, por así decirlo, es necesario ponernos del revés; creo, camaradas, que estas palabras y consignas son comprensibles, porque durante casi un año, durante mi ausencia forzada, han tenido en la práctica manejando los trabajos que se les encomiendan, para hablar y pensar en esto de diversas maneras y en cientos de ocasiones, y estoy seguro de que sus reflexiones en ese sentido pueden sólo conducen a una conclusión, a saber, que hoy debemos mostrar aún más la flexibilidad que empleamos hasta ahora en la Guerra Civil La serie de concesiones que nos adaptan a las potencias capitalistas es una serie de concesiones que les permite entrar en contacto con nosotros, les asegura una ganancia, que a veces es mayor, tal vez, de lo que debería ser. Al mismo tiempo, estamos cediendo sólo una pequeña parte de los medios de producción, que están en manos casi en su totalidad de nuestro Estado. El otro día los periódicos discutieron la concesión. propuesto por el inglés Urquhart, que hasta ahora ha estado contra nosotros casi durante toda la Guerra Civil; Solía decir: "Lograremos nuestro objetivo en la guerra civil contra Rusia; contra la Rusia que se ha atrevido a privarnos de esto y de aquello; Y después de todo eso, tuvimos que entrar en negociaciones con él; No las rechazamos; las emprendimos con la mayor alegría; pero dijimos: Ruego que me perdonen; pero no renunciaremos a lo que hemos conquistado: Nuestra Rusia es tan grande, nuestras potencialidades económicas son tan numerosas, y nos sentimos justificados para no rechazar su amable propuesta, pero la discutiremos sobriamente como hombres de negocios. Es cierto que de nuestra primera conversación no salió nada, porque no pudimos estar de acuerdo con su propuesta por razones políticas. Tuvimos que rechazarla. Mientras los británicos no contemplaran la posibilidad de nuestra participación en las negociaciones sobre el Estrecho, los Dardanelos, tuvimos que rechazarlo, pero inmediatamente después de hacerlo, tuvimos que empezar a examinar el asunto en el fondo. Discutimos si era o no ventajoso para nosotros, si nos beneficiaríamos de la celebración de este acuerdo de concesión y, en caso afirmativo, en qué circunstancias sería rentable. Teníamos que hablar del precio. Eso, camaradas, es lo que les muestra claramente cuánto nuestro presente enfoque de los problemas debe diferir de nuestro enfoque anterior Antiguamente el comunista decía: Doy mi vida, y le parecía muy sencillo, aunque no siempre era tan sencillo. Ahora, sin embargo, nosotros, los comunistas, nos enfrentamos a una tarea completamente diferente. Ahora debemos tener en cuenta todas las cosas, y cada uno de ustedes debe aprender a ser prudente. Debemos calcular cómo, en el entorno capitalista, podemos asegurar nuestra existencia, cómo podemos sacar provecho de nuestra enemigos que, por supuesto, negociarán, que nunca han olvidado cómo negociar y negociarán a nuestra costa. Tampoco lo olvidamos, y no me imaginamos en lo más mínimo a los comerciantes de cualquier parte convirtiéndose en corderos y habiéndose convertido en corderos, ofreciéndonos bendiciones de todo tipo a cambio de nada. Eso no sucede y no lo esperamos, pero cuenten con el hecho de que nosotros, que estamos acostumbrados a poner un luchará encontrará una salida y demostrará ser capaz de comerciar y obtener beneficios y salir seguros de situaciones económicas difíciles Esa es una tarea muy difícil Esa es la tarea en la que estamos trabajando ahora Me gustaría que nos diéramos cuenta claramente de lo grande que es el abismo entre las viejas y las nuevas tareas. Por grande que sea el abismo, aprendimos a maniobrar durante la guerra, y debemos comprender que la maniobra que ahora tenemos que actuar en medio de lo que estamos ahora es la más difícil Pero entonces parece ser nuestra última maniobra Debemos poner a prueba nuestra fuerza en este campo y demostrar que hemos aprendido algo más que las lecciones de ayer y no nos limitamos a repetir los fundamentos Nada de eso Hemos comenzado a reaprender y volveremos a aprender de tal manera que lograremos Y creo que es por el bien de este nuevo aprendizaje que debemos prometernos una vez más firmemente que, bajo el nombre de la Nueva Política Económica, hemos retrocedido, pero de tal manera que no renunciamos a nada de lo nuevo y, sin embargo, damos a los capitalistas tales ventajas que obligarán a cualquier Estado, por hostil que sea a nosotros, a establecer contactos y a tratar con nosotros El camarada Krasin, que ha tenido muchas conversaciones con Urquhart, cabeza y columna vertebral de toda la intervención, dijo que Urquhart, después de todos sus intentos de imponernos a toda costa el viejo sistema en toda Rusia, se sentó en la misma mesa que él con Krasin, y comenzó a preguntar: ¿Cuál es el precio?, ¿Cuánto?, ¿Por cuántos años? Aplausos. Esto está todavía muy lejos de que concluyamos acuerdos de concesión y, por lo tanto, de firmemos un tratado: relaciones que son perfectamente precisas y vinculantes desde el punto de vista de la sociedad burguesa, pero ya podemos ver que estamos llegando a ella, casi hemos llegado a ella, pero no hemos llegado del todo Debemos admitirlo, camaradas, y no nos descontrolamos Todavía estamos lejos de haber logrado plenamente las cosas que nos harán fuertes, autosuficientes y tranquilamente confiados en que ningún acuerdo capitalista puede asustarnos, tranquilamente confiados en que, sin embargo, Es por eso que el trabajo, tanto político como de partido, que hemos comenzado en esta esfera, debe continuar, y es por eso que debemos cambiar de los viejos métodos a otros completamente nuevos. Todavía tenemos la vieja maquinaria, y nuestra tarea ahora es remodelarla según nuevas líneas. No podemos hacerlo de inmediato, pero debemos asegurarnos de que los comunistas que tenemos estén debidamente colocados. Lo que necesitamos es que ellos, los comunistas, controlen la maquinaria a la que están asignados, y no, como sucede a menudo con nosotros, que la maquinaria los controle a ellos. Tales son las tareas y las dificultades a las que nos enfrentamos, y eso en un momento en que hemos emprendido nuestro camino práctico, cuando no debemos acercarnos al socialismo como si fuera un icono pintado de colores festivos. Tenemos que tomar la dirección correcta, tenemos que ver que todo esté controlado, que las masas, toda la población, comprueben el camino que seguimos y digamos: Sí, esto es Mejor que el viejo sistema Esa es la tarea que nos hemos propuesto Nuestro Partido, un pequeño grupo de personas en comparación con la población total del país, ha abordado esta tarea Este pequeño núcleo se ha propuesto la tarea de rehacer todo y lo hará. Hemos demostrado que esto no es una utopía, sino una causa por la que la gente vive. Todos hemos visto esto. Esto ya se ha hecho. rehacer las cosas de tal manera que la gran mayoría de las masas, los campesinos y los obreros, dirán: No sois vosotros los que os alabáis a vosotros mismos, sino nosotros Decimos que habéis logrado resultados espléndidos, después de los cuales ninguna persona inteligente soñará jamás con volver a lo viejo Todavía no hemos llegado a ese punto. Por eso, la NEP sigue siendo la principal corriente _and lema abarcador de hoy _We no olvidará una una de las consignas que aprendimos ayer, podemos decirlo con bastante calma, sin la menor vacilación, diríselo a cualquiera, y cada paso que damos lo demuestra, Pero todavía tenemos que adaptarnos a la Nueva Política Económica Hay que saber superar, reducir a un mínimo definitivo todos sus aspectos negativos, que no es necesario enumerar y que ustedes conocen perfectamente Debemos saber cómo Arreglarlo todo con astucia Nuestra legislación nos da todas las oportunidades para hacerlo ¿Seremos capaces de hacer que las cosas funcionen correctamente? Eso está todavía lejos de estar resuelto. Estamos haciendo un estudio de las cosas. Cada número de nuestro periódico del Partido les ofrece una docena de artículos que les dicen que en tal o cual fábrica, propiedad de tal o cual persona, las condiciones de alquiler son tales y tales, mientras que en otra donde nuestro camarada comunista es el gerente, los términos son tales y tales. ¿Produce una ganancia o no? ¿Paga su camino o no? Nos hemos acercado al núcleo mismo de los problemas cotidianos, y eso es un logro tremendo. El socialismo ya no es una cuestión de un futuro lejano, o una imagen abstracta, o un ícono. Nuestra opinión sobre los íconos es la misma, una muy mala. Hemos llevado el socialismo a la vida cotidiana y Esta es la tarea de nuestros días, la tarea de nuestra época. Permítanme concluir expresando la confianza en que, por difícil que pueda ser esta tarea, por nueva que pueda ser comparada con nuestra tarea anterior, y por numerosas que puedan ser las dificultades que conlleva, no la cumpliremos todos en un día, sino en unos pocos años, todos juntos, cueste lo que cueste, de modo que La Rusia de la NEP se convertirá en la Rusia socialista