### Introduction


Mining is older than the market and capitalism. Silver was money-capital in Europe, copper was money-capital in China, and gold was money-capital in the Middle East during the thirteen century. Mining in the Andes was at the core of original accumulation and made possible the expansion of a world-system economy under Western hegemony since the beginning of the sixteenth century. It's a branch of industry that has been made with capitalist development and always was under the control of the upper capitalist class. Since the firsts years of the XX century, mining investments in the Andes and Latin America were almost completely monopolized by the U.S. international mining bourgeoisie until the XXI century, when their advanced hegemony crisis was followed by the intensification of the interstate competition for mobile capital in the world-system, changing the structure of the transnational capitalist class productive capital in the region and sub-region. Gradually, China mining operations increased in Latin America since the first years of the XXI century, as the imperialist domination base from which the TCC mining bourgeoisie is in the core, couldn't exclude Chinese mining corporations from the mining industry in the countries in which U.S. had an indirect rule. The exception of China mining transnational expansion, as we already see in the past section, is in the particular gold mining sector, which some of their implications were descripted in the past section of this document.
In the actual critical juncture of capitalism's systemic chaos, anti-mining struggles in the Andes and Latin America acquire an anti-imperialistic and anti-systemic meaning. To initiate a new systemic cycle of accumulation, the transnational capitalist class requires investing the enormous magnitude of money-capital already accumulated in the branches of industry that larger profits can return. Until new industries or future technological innovations could offer larger profits to the transnational capitalist class, their productive capital will be located intensively in the branches of industries that they already know can provide larger-profit returns. A new material expansion phase is a necessary condition for another cycle of financial expansion, but this time the extended accumulation circuit mechanism could be reaching its natural limits. Not only climate change but also historical change constrains and obstructs capitalism reconstitution at the present. Anti-mining struggles in the Andes exhibit an example of a direct challenge to the transnational capitalist class, supported by the indigenous peasantry in a unique front with other vanguards, against the expansion of the mining extractive frontier which is destroying the land and the water, values they need for their social reproduction. The contradiction between capital accumulation and life conditions is most evident when and where water is concentrated by the mining transnational companies despite people's access to water for living and labor. Anti-mining struggles in the Andes are class struggles of strategical centrality because at least four reasons: 1) exhibit the reemergence of the indigenous peasantry as a revolutionary subject in the Andes in the XXI century, 2) challenges imperialist domination, resisting the expansion of the mining extractive frontier imposed by the means of militarized accumulation, 3) have an anti-systemic effect on the circuit of extended capital accumulation by obstructing the operation of the productive capital invested in mining projects by the transnational capitalist class, and 4) are developing in a critical historical juncture of global capitalism systemic chaos.
The following sections will develop each of the four arguments provided to explain the strategical centrality of one subtype of mining contention: anti-mining struggles, for the development of class struggle at a global scale and it's effects not only over the militarized accumulation of capital but also over it's extended accumulation mechanism of reproduction.
