# Antisystemic Effects of Andean Peasants Antimining Struggles_2024-07-18 17:12
## Introduction

The modern world-system structural processes producing antisystemic resistances are vital for the extended reproduction of capital in the current world-economy. The effects of antisystemic resistance executed by the antimining movement evidence an advanced point of the development of class struggle oriented to the identity formation of historical challengers in absolute antagonism with the reproduction of imperialist capitals. The antisystemic effects of antimining struggles in Los Andes operate on the vital structural processes of the capitalist world-economy. 

The development of the processes of production and circulation of capital of the main branch of capitalist industry: mining, and gold mining in particular; systematically structured the historical resistance of the Andean indigenous and cholo peasantry against the expansive dispossession and destruction of the vital values for their social reproduction: water and land.

As means to guarantee capital accumulation, the masacres of the indigenous peasantry and its proletarianized cholo sons and grandsons in Los Andes operated as a constant during colonial mining and imperialist mining. Colonial mining in Los Andes was the foundational method of the expanded original accumulation of the sixteenth century (Marx 1867, 874-875, 915) correspondent to the cycle of material expansion of the European oligarchic financial bourgeoisies (Arrighi 1994) that emerged from the precedent process of financial expansion of mercantile capital from the Middle East during the thirteen century (Abu-Lughod 1991), shaping the formation of the modern world-system. Imperialist mining is a central industrial process of production and hoarding vital for the expanded capital reproduction of competing monopolistic financial capitalists operating by multinational corporations and capitalist states under conditions of militarism at a world-scale.

In their effort to conceptualize the antisystemic effects of the movements produced by the systemic structural process of the world-economy, Arrighi et al. (1989, 88) treated the antisystemic effects as caused by the centralization of capital as a world-scale tendency highly developed under the imperialist world-economy, and highlighted the divergence of the potentially serious [new] social locations of the antisystemic movements. Nevertheless, the causal mechanisms which connected the systemic structural processes of the imperialist world-economy with the consistent constitution of antisystemic identities in absolute negation with the expansive necessity of the metabolism of capital reproduction at a world-scale, weren't yet evidenced.

I argue, that the effects of historic antisystemic challengers produced by the expansive structural processes vital for the reproduction of the imperialist world-economy are real in their consequences over the rate of profit by the obstruction of the circulation time on the transformation of surplus value into profit, gold hoarding, and over the expected organic composition of advanced capital of the imperialist bourgeoisies in the processes of production and circulation, effecting not also the metabolic mechanisms of capital reproduction but also shifting the scale and the conditions of the imperialistic competence facing the forthcoming repartition world-wars.

As the events presented, the emergence of new challengers with distinguished antagonistic identities appear as reminders of the development of history, and were treated as traces or rather clues to look for a research question operative enough to give a theory-builded hypothesis. Then we look for the processes of the "modern" capitalist world-economy at its advanced age of five centuries, using the well instrumented for that purpose the critique of its political economy developed by Karl Marx, considering a particular path of Anti-imperialist political thought distinguished by the contributions of Marxists as Rosa Luxemburg, V.I. Lenin, Nikolai Bukharin, Mao Tse-Tung, José Carlos Mariátegui, and Anibal Quijano.

As the integrative function of the traditional left into the multilevel polity cease to be effective as an instrument of cooptation rather than of representation, the new left, particularly the sector of new social movements, progressive left and populist parties, and also foquismo (Debray) found its frame realignment capacity limited, giving place to the constitution of antisystemic identities of historical antagonist in advanced contradiction with the systemic tendencies and vital world-scale processes of capital reproduction. The location of this antisystemic historical resistance in Los Andes is indigenous in its broad base, structurally placed in subordination by the material expansion of the competitive colonial policy for mining exploitation, trade and hoarding of mercantile capitals in its attempted transition to the oligarchic financial bourgeoisie which held the modern world-system under four successive Western inner-transitions since the XVI century.

Mining links with the materially subordinated or dependent capitalist industries which effectively offers a rate of profit of the magnitud of interest for the competing imperialist bourgeoisies, as the war industry, space industry, and computational and high-technology industries, also suggest an analysis of the world-scale effects of antimining struggles because of its consequences on the turnover time and capital organic composition determined by the natural, cultural and, as the antisystemic resistance of indigenous and cholo Andean peasantry evidence: historical conditions in which the vital processes of production and circulation of capital as a whole materially operate.

As a whole, the reproduction of certain capital involves the transformation of money-capital in productive-capital for an expected rate of profit equal to the ratio between the surplus-value already in the form of certain volume of commodities (including exportations) ready for market consumption at a fixed price, and the total capital advanced (Marx 1864-1865[2017], 49-55; Bukharin 1916 [1966], 81-82). The  differentiated reproduction outcomes obtained by concrete capitalists in the rate of profit depend not only on the natural and cultural production conditions expressed in the organic and technical composition of capital at each instance of the whole circuit of capital reproduction. The differentiation mechanism operating at the level of the rate of profit depend on the transformation of surplus value into profit at a concrete time of circulation, not only given by the  predicted proportions of variable and constant capital consumption, which includes not only the production of commodities harnessing the international division of labor by controlling the magnitudes of variable capital taking advantage of the cost price differences between the wages in the capitalist states ruled by a certain imperialist international bourgeoisie and the wages in Los Andes at the different instances of the processes of production and circulation. And also by the precedent repartition of that super-profit exploited in its components: interest, profit and rent.

But a power antagonize this reproduction processes and mechanisms vital for the modern world-system world-economy. The anti-mining struggles decrease the rate of profit of imperialist mining bourgeoisies contesting the competition for material expansion of the circuit of capital accumulation under conditions of shared imperialism between the imperialists bourgeoisies ruling the U.S. capitalist state and the imperialist bourgeoisies ruling China capitalist state. The antimining peasants’ struggles in the Andes of South America obstruct effectively the conversion of the money invested as mining productive capital by different imperialist bourgeoisies in competition for the extension of its reproduction circuit scale employing its militarized colonial policy over the territories cursed by the abundance of mineral commodities under different forms of militarism, as military interventions in Latin America, or as new imperialist wars as initially expressed in Ukraine and Gaza ongoing multilevel polity conflicts.

The processes of production and circulation of mining imperialist productive capital had been challenged by proletarian mining workers struggles in China at the coal and lead mines of Anyuan, Pinghsiang County (Kiangsi Province) and Shuikoushan, Changning (Hunan Province) between 1922 and 1927; as well as in Peru in episodes of mining contention identified as the massacres of Malpaso (1930), Toquepala (1966), and Cobriza (1971). Nevertheless, the cooperation between the peasants movement and the proletarian mining workers in China developed in the revolution of 1927 and the further national resistance against Japanese and U.S. imperialism, while in Peru the extension of that revolutionary coalition is a matter of polemic between historians of the peasants movement and mining workers struggles. The development of the peasantry as a class for itself sparked as the final decades of the XX century, the indigenous rebellion in Ecuador of 1991 and the Chiapas liberation by the EZLN in 1998, preceded the resistance against the expansion of the mining extractive frontier accelerated since the first years of the XXI century.

The antimining struggles of the Andean indigenous peasantry is historically grounded in the problem of land. The dispossession and destruction of vital values for the social reproduction of the peasantry and the rural proletariat as the soil and water bodies of the intervened lands by mining industry, made inconciliable the expansion of the mining extractive frontier with the existence not only of the peasantry, but with the existence of all the biodiversity due to the destruction of the conditions for life in general, and not only of the cultural or natural conditions for peasant economies but for the reproduction of the rural proletariat surrounding the mining enclave of imperialist capital.

REV: The antagonism of the social reproduction of the cholo and indigenous peasantry and the rural proletariat against the conditions of reproduction of imperialist mining capital. That is also irreconciliable with the life of all the species in the territories destroyed by the expansion of the colonial policy of control and repartition over the sources, production, transportation and hoarding of mineral resources in the world economy.

The comparison between mining proletariat struggles and anti-mining peasant struggles is expressing more than a identity shift, it is evidencing that the contradictory tendencies of capital production by the increasing subordination of labor by proletarianization and super-exploitation which created the class antisystemic movements of the XX century.... maturated and constituted a political subject of abstract negation in the antagonistic identity of the anti-mining fronts against the militarism of imperialist mining. Imperialist mining is a central productive and hoarding process for the widespread reproduction of the capital of multinational corporations and capitalist states under the direct and indirect control of competing financial capitalists over capitalist states and its subordinated states and social classes, not only the peasantry and the proletariat but the commercial, financial, industrial and merely bureaucratic fractions of the domestics bourgeoisie and the oligarchy.

Although past mining contention waves of antisystemic resistance occurred during transitional stages of capitalism modern world-system development -i.e. as the mining proletariat struggles developed in Peru and Great Britain during the first quarter of the 1900’s, or in China during the first years of the second-, the current restructuration attempt of the modern capitalist world-economy not only depend on a completed transition in the afterwards of U.S. hegemony breakdown. Due to the advanced symptoms of the overaccumulation crisis and its attempted resolution, first through the liberalization of the gold price out of the financial institutions of Bretton Woods in 1971 (Fig. 1), and then through the extension of the mining extractive frontier particularly of gold production motivated by the demand of monetary gold holdings for national reserve’s banks exponentially since 2001; the tendency to accumulate monetary gold in national reserves that was strongly monopolistic under U.S. financial capital until the beginning of the new millennia began to be followed not only by the European central banks but also by Russia, India, and specifically China. The last mentioned great interstate power increased its acquisition of gold for its national reserves, as its superiority in monetary holdings compared to U.S. (Fig. 2) requires a balance in proportion to its monetary-gold holdings (Fig.3) to overcome the U.S. dollar as hegemonic currency, and intensified its capital production by gold mining in national contexts under which the situation of sinoamerican shared imperialism remains, as in Latin America.

Define shared imperialism.

Although the U.S. extractive bourgeoisie has laid the institutional and military bases of imperialist domination in Peru since the beginning of the 20th century, the neoliberal advance of globalization processes during the century’s last decades favored increasing foreign direct investments also from mining corporations based on China, Canada and Japan. This shows how the international mining bourgeoisie takes advantage of the institutional and military conditions established by the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie to operate in Peru, with a considerable expansion in copper mining but a still reduced share of gold mining. Indeed, imperialist mining is a political regime of militarized accumulation which employ state violence to protect the profits of the international mining bourgeoisie as a fraction of the TCC, and not only the U.S. mining companies.

## section

Since the beginning of the 20th century, the mining industry in the Andes was under the almost exclusive control of the imperialist U.S. bourgeoise. Mining was one of the industries where capitalism developed more rapidly, especially in the Andes, where since 1895 monopolistic capital was directed towards large scale mining, oil production and agriculture. The mining bourgeoisie is an hegemonic fraction of the imperialist rule coalition in Peru (Mariátegui 1928:21; Quijano 1988:116-21), and one of the central nodes of the transnational capitalist class (TCC). Indeed, the mining struggles carried out by miners’ unions were, since their genesis, _active principles_ of anti-imperialist resistance in Peru.

The process of union formation and politicization of the emerging mining proletariat in the central highlands of Peru went through a process of increasing radicalization during most of the 20th century. The intensity and harshness of military repression applied against miners protests at the Peruvian central Andes, including the massacres of Malpaso (1930) and Cobriza (1971), reveal the severity of mining struggles. The radicalization of mining workers’ protests converges with the formation of a vanguard of Peruvian proletariat in open confrontation with the imperialist U.S. mining bourgeoisie.

**The historical resistance of antisystemic anti-mining peasant struggles in Los Andes**
Around ten million of indigenous peoples survived the destruction of their old civilizations during conquest, the world didn't fit anymore in their consciousness. But in their consciousness survives a myth or a myth still makes sense in their consciousness, it is the myth of the new indigenous, of the Yawar-Inti (Blood Sun) and the resurgence of the indigenous world by a revolutionary vendetta. In opposition to Arboleda’s (2020) interpretation about the formation of indigenous “identity politics”, I argue that indigenous revolutionary subjectivity is an historical formation in movement, developing as an antagonist peasant class in formal subsumption under capitalism since the XVI century. 
Martín Arboleda states:
“Already in the 1990s, before so called “identity politics” gained prominence in international academic circles, Ecuadorian philosopher Bolívar Echeverria—a renowned theoretician of cultural syncretism and capitalist modernity in Latin America—was already puzzled by the self-defeating cultural essentialisms of emerging variants of Latin American indigenous politics. Pre-Hispanic cultures in the Americas, he argued, were undergirded by profoundly relational cosmologies and hence were unable to perceive the “Other” as independent alterity. The otherness they perceived in the Spanish colonizers was for them a mere variant of the sameness of their own collective self. The European mindset, on the other hand, always construed the cultural other in terms of radical alterity, as absolute negation of their own identity” (Arboleda 2020:210). 
For Arboleda (2020) as for Bolívar Echevarria, the indigenous people couldn't understand the antagonism between them and the Spaniards. Their cosmology, they believe, didn't allow the indigenous to realize that they were being killed by a collective external and antagonist to their life or “collective self”. We need definitely to understand that Bolívar Echevarria should have ideologically omitted the work of the Peruvian anthropologist Luis E. Valcárcel, not to force an approximation to the work of José Carlos Mariátegui who found an already in movement indigenous revolutionary subject when they were going to work in their politization, at the beginnings of the twentieth century. Fortunately, the work of Alberto Flores Galindo (2010), made justice to this issue tracing the myth of Yawar-Inti in emblematic indigenous and popular struggles of Peru’s history.
As the new indigenous and cholo intellectuals create the prophets of this myth, indigenous socialism forged at the beginnings of the XX century as the convergence of the "cholo group" with the indigenous peasantry already organizing themselves for indigenous revolution. The work of Mariátegui, Mayer and Valcárcel in the organization and creation of indigenous socialism, found an indigenous reemergence myth already in operation. The revolution realizes as a vendetta for the new indigenous, their remnants, their sons and grandsons. Revolution as a movement was already in operation in the Andes when the Amautas headed by José Carlos Mariátegui initiate their work.  As he wrote in the prologue of “Tempestad en los Andes” de Valcárcel (Valcárcel 1927):
“I remember the unexpected and impressive type of agitator that I found four years ago in the Puno Indian Ezequiel Urviola. This encounter was the biggest surprise that Peru reserved for me upon my return from Europe. Urviola represented the first spark of a fire to come. He was the revolutionary Indian, the socialist Indian. Tuberculous, hunchbacked, he succumbed after two years of tireless work. Today it doesn't matter that Urviola doesn't exist. It's enough that he existed. As Valcárcel says, today the mountains are pregnant with Spartacs” (Mariátegui in the prologue to Valcárcel 1927:11).
As I will argue later, the history of indigenous class struggle definitely precedes socialism, but most importantly the indigenous peasantry has learned how to instrumentalize it. Further, at the first quart of the 21th century, the indigenous peasantry not only instrumentalizes socialism but also environmentalism (Mejía 2021) fixed with the conjuring of sentient entities as mountains, water and soil (de la Cadena 2020). The "cholo group" is a social stratum in formation that emerges from the mass of the indigenous peasantry servile or semi-servile, differentiated by the incorporation of elements from the Western-criollo culture. Yet, at the same time holding, preserving or recognizing their difference and their origins in the indigenous culture and in the indigenous peasantry social structure, as the mass from which they detached by migration (Quijano 1980:63-65).
As de la Cadena (2005:18) emphasizes about the visionary work of José María Arguedas: “[u]ltimately, Todas las Sangres proposed an alternative indigenous social movement, a critical ally of the modern left— yet with an a-modern hybrid logic of its own. Literacy and modern politics were important, yet they had to be selectively used and translated, rather than eradicating, indigenous ways”. The hybridity in this sense is performative and not a reproduction of western modernization as acculturation, instead the cholos as indigenous descendants have been building a proper cultural logic which recognizes their indigenous origins and also appropriates modern western elements, as they do with environmental discourses in the anti-mining and mining struggles . As the case of the anti-mining struggles of Cajamarca illustrate, the cholo and indigenous peasantry actualized their interpretation of mining from a class perspective fed by ecological discourses (Mejía 2021) and indigenous cosmopolitics (de la Cadena 2020) in the defense of water, land and life.

****Anti-mining and mining struggles in the Andes as an anti-systemic movement***
Anti-mining struggles have an anti-systemic effect on the TCC's circuit of extended capital accumulation. By blocking the expansion of the mining extractive frontier and obstructing the production of mining commodities, anti-mining struggles are challenging the circulation of the productive capital of the international mining bourgeoisie. Likewise, by obstructing the production and circulation of mining commodities, the capital accumulation circuit of the TCC can't accomplish the conversion of their productive capital into augmented money-capital. If the mineral commodities aren’t sold in the international market, the TCC's capital invested in mining extraction can't return in the form of profits and increased capital. 
Since the early years of the 20th century, mining investments in the Andes and Latin America were basically monopolized by the U.S. international mining bourgeoisie.  Gradually, in the 21st century China’s mining operations increased in Latin America since the imperialist domination couldn't exclude Chinese corporations from the mining industry in countries where U.S. imperialism  rules. The exception to China’s mining transnational expansion in the Andes is the gold mining sector; with relevant implications for the dynamics of transition, hegemonic crisis, and regime of accumulation in the current critical juncture of global capitalism. 
The total reserves of China in 2021 (3,43 trillion US$) are 4.79 times the volume of total reserves of U.S. for the same year (716,15 billion US$) (Fig.1). Although, the U.S. total gold reserves for the same last year 2021 was of 475,95 billion, and China’s total gold reserves only ascend to 114,01 billion (0,114 trillion) (Fig.2).
A long twentieth century of imperialism over gold mining countries apparently holds a current U.S. high advantage in monetary gold holdings, which imply a non-actually completed transition to China as a new hegemonic state of global capitalism. Antimining and mining struggles against U.S. gold mining and China copper mining in Peru evidenced a complex dynamic of imperialist mining from which approaches of U.S. hegemonic crisis and the initiation of a fifth systemic cycle of accumulation with “Chinese characteristics” can be problematized beyond.
In the actual critical juncture of capitalism's systemic chaos (Arrighi and Silver 1999), anti-mining struggles in the Andes and Latin America take an anti-imperialistic and anti-systemic role. To initiate a fifth systemic cycle of accumulation, the transnational capitalist class requires investing the enormous magnitude of money-capital already accumulated in the branches of industry where larger profits can be obtained.  Until new industries or future technological innovations  could offer larger profits to the TCC, their productive capital will be located intensively in the branches of industry they know can provide larger profit returns, as mining. A new material expansion phase is a necessary condition for another cycle of financial expansion, but this time the extended accumulation circuit mechanism could be reaching its natural limits . Not only climate change but also historical change constrains and obstructs capitalism reconstitution at the present.

Until the beginning of the Twenty First century, the rising tide of environmental struggles carried out by peasant mobilization against the imperialist mining bourgeoisie takes particular relevance to the development of class struggle in general. As an industry of larger profits, mining is monopolized by the TCC across colonial and imperialist mining periods, making mining a post-colonial element of the political economy of Andean societies. Mining is a feature of the indigenous peasantry class foundation that goes beyond coloniality and imperialism, which with other elements of indigenous and cholo political syncretism flow in conjunction with new historical processes of class struggle, technological innovation and interstate competition for mobile capital.

Mining industry, taken as a large-profitable investment for capital accumulation by transnational capitalist class, exhibits clearly the other side of extended reproduction, the militarized dimension of capital accumulation actualizes today in the repression of indigenous peasants anti-mining struggles. In this sense, anti-mining struggles require study as a priority field of contention for class struggle development in the Andean region, considering their position in the mines of the capital accumulation circuit in a period in which financial capital requires another phase of material expansion. The realization of another cycle of capital accumulation -a more profitable one for capitalist reproduction- actually depends on their high profitable industries to take a big breath by the circulation of money capital into productive capital (MCM'). Indeed, anti-mining struggles grow as limits to capital accumulation and imperialist domination in the Andes, in Latin America and at a global scale.

O'Connor (1984) tried to remind to other radical thinkers in the middle of the 80's, that Marxist theorists _“left few clues regarding possible 'external barriers' to capitalist accumulation in the form of either 'limits to growth' determined by the availability of natural resources or [...] limits to accumulation determined by cultural-ideological conditions of economic and social reproduction”_ (O’Connor 1984:6). Environmental socialist struggles, as he would also state, are a central field of contention _“to combat the attempt by capital and the state to ideologically construct and politically use the current crisis to restructure economic, political, and social life with the sole purpose of renewed capitalist accumulation, including a new 'long wave' of ideological innovation”_ (O'Connor 1984:23). Nevertheless, the material challenge that environmental socialist struggles display over militarized accumulation, as in antimining struggles in the Andes, show a further development of the ideological struggles mentioned by James O’Connor.

**Anti-mining struggles blocking the expansion of the U.S. gold mining extractive frontier in Cajamarca**

The expansion of the extractive frontier of Minera Yanacocha-Newmont[[i]](#edn1) in Cajamarca has been contested by an anti-mining movement that employs what is called a unique front[[ii]](#edn2) strategy. It has proven to be effective in creating sufficient people’s social power to confront imperialist mining. The harshness of the military’s repression against the popular and mainly peasant anti-mining movement in Cajamarca revealed the cruelty of the imperialist domination in Peru, just after the democratic election of a president of nationalist and military background (Ollanta Humala).  The anti-mining struggles in Cajamarca taught us that peasant struggles can be interpreted and developed as anti-imperialist struggles, since they imply a class confrontation between two extremes of capitalist accumulation: the international mining bourgeoisie and the indigenous peasantry. The challenge that anti-mining struggles represent for the central nucleus of imperialist domination in countries where mining constitutes the main enclave of capitalist accumulation, points to the strategic nature of the anti-mining struggles. They are the spearhead for the development of an anti-systemic movement, as well as critical for the geo-economics needs of the dynamics of capital accumulation during the current systemic crisis (Veltmeyer 2015:124; Wallerstein 2002:38).

The anti-mining struggles for the defense of Quilish mountain and the water sources of Cajamarca in 2004 had shown the effectiveness of the unique front strategy: they have joined the efforts of multiple organizations. These include: peasant nightwatch organizations[[iii]](#_edn3) (“rondas campesinas”), irrigation boards (“juntas de riego”), urban nightwatch organizations (“rondas urbanas”), the teachers union at the provincial and district level (SUTEP-Cajamarca), fractions of the PCP-PR[[iv]](#_edn4) of Cajamarca, and university students and environmental NGOs such as Ecovida and Grufides.  Since the beginning of the struggle against the Conga mining project of Minera Yanacocha-Newmont in November 2011, the environmental defense fronts confronted the government of the recently elected president Ollanta Humala who had promised to the peasants that Cajamarca’s lagoons would not be destroyed nor would mining be allowed without popular consent.

In this context, the sustained anti-mining campaign opposing Minera Yanacocha-Newmont's Conga project escalated, contesting not only to the U.S. gold mining company, but directly the administration and government of the former military captain and President Ollanta Humala. The formation of the environmental defense fronts at the beginning of the first decade of the 2000s in Cajamarca was the result of a political coalition between the environmental NGOs –particularly Ecovida–, the teachers provincial union (SUTEP Cajamarca) and the peasant nightwatch organizations then controlled by the PCP-PR, as an effective strategy to unite the popular forces in defense of Cajamarca's water sources. However, after some time this coalition lost control of the popular anti-mining movement.

In this context, a new group of leaders, composed of radical professional politicians, garnered control of the movement, limiting the role of the PCP-PR and the environmental NGOs.  Thus, in September of 2010, Celendin's first declaration was made to create the Interprovincial Coordinator for the Defense of the Environment, which forged a new strong coalition for anti-mining struggles including second-level organizations of five provinces located in the direct influence area of the Conga mining project (Interview LM2 03/06/2014). This coalition would allow coordination between the environmental NGOs, led by Marco Arana (GRUFIDES), and the radical fraction of the popular movement of Cajamarca led by Wilfredo Saavedra. As the latter was gaining strength among the peasant and urban bases of Cajamarca, bringing together fractions of the teacher’s union (SUTEP Cajamarca) and peasant and urban nightwatch organizations (“rondas campesinas y urbanas”) opposed to the control of the PCP-PR, the frictions between these sectors worsened.

With the formation of this new coalition, the sector of Wilfredo Saavedra would be in charge of learning and translating the environmental framework to a broader sector of the peasantry, university students and neighborhood organizations.[[v]](#_edn5) This demonstrated the capacity of the radical sector leadership to further broaden the bases of the unique front against the expansion of the extractive frontier of Minera Yanacocha-Newmont. The radicalization of the struggle began on November 24, 2011, when the peasants of Bambamarca and Celendín took over the lagoons that the Conga Mining Project planned to destroy. This performance of struggle required an effective organizational structure that would allow the mobilization and rotation of 200 peasants every two days to prevent the machinery of Minera Yanacocha, the police and the military from entering the lagoons and taking control of water sources (Interview LM5 03/08/2014).

The magnitude of the repression carried out by the government of Ollanta Humala crudely demonstrates the operation of mining accumulation by repression against the peasantry of Cajamarca. The militarization of Cajamarca was order by decree RS 231-2012-DE, which imposed the state of emergency from May 29 to June 25, 2012 in the provinces of Cajamarca, Celendín and Hualgayoc.

In this context, on July 3, 2012, during the 34th day of the regional strike (“paro regional indefinido”) in Cajamarca, the military forces killed four peasants in the town’s square of Celendín:

“Here, on July 3, it happened that the police and the military were down on the corner [..] when they started shooting at us, then the people who were here in the central square [of Celendín] began to run through different places […]; and the people […] took shelter here in the church of the Virgen del Carmen. And when the police and the military came […] wanting to break it down [the door] […]. The priests were inside […], the door of the church was open to shelter us because if it hadn't been open suddenly more of us would have been killed; but thank God the door was open, and we entered, more or less 200 people. We were sheltered inside from around 4[pm]in the afternoon until 8:30 at night, until the priest asked the Ombudsman of the Peruvian state to come and get us out: because we couldn't go out because the military and the police were full [at] [the courtyard of the church]. […] And then they thought that we had thrown stones at each other, we had killed each other with stones [referring to the fallacious and blatant lies of the then Minister of the Interior, who had “informed” that the [four] dead in Celendín were a result of stones thrown by the protesters themselves]. But it wasn't true because my son had the bullet that had entered his mouth. The first helicopter that came, then […] since he was filming the helicopter, like this [raises an arm and makes the gesture of holding a video camera or cell phone pointed at the sky] […] the bullet had entered through his mouth and had stayed […] in the brain. So that was what they had taken out [in the autopsy] because the little teeth here and the bones there [touches his mouth] had been found in his stomach” (SERVINDI 2014).[**[vi]**](#_edn6)

The mobilized groups in Celendín marched to the Municipality’s building to demand the town Mayor Mauro Silas to stay on the people’s side in their struggle to defend the lagoons.  The shots made by the military from the balcony of the municipal building and from helicopters, exhibited the magnitude of the imperialist mining repression. The brutality of the military’s repression of the popular anti-mining movement in Cajamarca revealed the imperialist nature of the domination exercised by the international mining bourgeoisie.

**Obstructing China’s copper mining under imperialist U.S. domination in Apurímac**

The cruelty of the imperialist repression against the mining workers during the 20th century reveals the magnitude of the repression of the anti-mining struggle carried out by the peasantry today, after a century of political mining contention in Peru. The social formation that currently directly confronts extractive mining capital is the peasantry, not the mining proletariat. By claiming the defense of water, land and life against the extension of the extractive frontier, anti-mining struggles show themselves to be absolutely antagonistic to the extractive capitalist accumulation process. That is, as a frontal struggle against the international mining bourgeoisie, and even beyond, the anti-mining struggle confronts the capitalist system and the productive and commercial dynamics that sustain it on a global scale, blocking its reproduction. Faced with this problem, imperialist domination mobilized the armed military forces to enforce  the interests of the mining bourgeoisie (Lust 2016:5).

On Friday, October 14, 2016, two hundred indigenous peasants from the communities of Choquecca, Quehuira, Allahua, Antuyo and Pumamarca, located in the province of Cotabambas (Apurímac), began a road blockade obstructing the trucks loaded with mineral ore through the mining road used by the Chinese capital company MMG Limited Las Bambas. The peasant communities demanded payment from the mining company for the use of a communal road within their territories, through which the mine site connects to the main mining road and the trucks loaded with mineral ore head to the port of Matarani in the region of Arequipa. The road blockade that started that morning was brutally cleared by the police, killing community member Quintino Cereceda Huiza with a bullet to the head and wounding twenty more peasants. A few days later, the Minister of the Interior (security) Carlos Basombrío, declared that the police forces were not authorized in any way to clear the road blockade that day (El Comercio 2016:8).

The communities of southern Cotabambas rebelled against the power of the Chinese mining company MMG Limited Las Bambas for 186 days until April 17, 2017, when the province of Cotabambas was assigned the state of emergency, authorizing military repression against community members. Although the mining struggle of the peasant communities of Cotabambas (Apurímac) against the Chinese mining company MMG Limited Las Bambas[[vii]](#_edn7) did not include an anti-mining claim -as in Cajamarca-, the magnitude of the repression executed to secure the interests of China’s mining bourgeoisie confirms that imperialist mining is ruled by the TCC.

**Conclusions**

The article shows that anti-mining struggles have an anti-system effect on the TCC's circuit of extended capital accumulation, and effectively challenge imperialist domination in Peru. By blocking the expansion of mining’s territorial frontier and obstructing the production and circulation of mining commodities, anti-mining struggles challenge the mining bourgeoisie and the circulation of its productive capital.

The effectiveness of obstructive anti-mining performances in Peru was revealed at least since 2004, with the success of the anti-mining protests against Minera Yanacocha-Newmont and the withdrawal of government authorization to explore the Quilish mountain in Cajamarca. The increasingly radical nature of the contentious performances by the peasants of Huambocancha Alta and Huambocancha Baja achieved an uninterrupted blockade of the access route to Minera Yanacocha-Newmont gold mine, and stalled the police forces sent to unblock it. Although  it wasn’t  the first time that highway was blocked during episodes of  anti-mining contention in Cajamarca, it is worth saying that such the blockade leads to the gradual stoppage of the mine’s gold mining activities, significantly affecting its production and profits (Mejía 2021:97).

Ross (2003:54, 62) points out that minerals are a type of natural resource whose transport is relatively  easy to obstruct, which has implications for the duration and intensity of extractive conflicts. The blockade implied not only the impossibility of access and exit to the mine’s facilities, but also the expensive use of helicopters for the supply of fuel, equipment, labor and other supplies (Pérez Mundaca 2012:70-71). Thus, the obstructive performance  blocking  the Cajamarca-Bambamarca highway ended up drowning Minera Yanacocha-Newmont, proving to be an effective performance of struggle for almost the entire duration of the anti-mining campaign for the defense of Quilish mountain (Mejía 2021:98-99).

Innovative obstructive performances shared in Apurímac and Cajamarca highlight the way in which imperialist mining operates in the Andes. The companies of the international mining bourgeoisie need to establish the flow of the extracted mineral either to a smelting plant -such as the Southern Peru Copper Corporation has in Moquegua-, or directly to the port of Matarani in Arequipa. As suggested by Ye et al. (2020:7), mining TNC claim the monopolized control of the territory and its resources, but also of the entry and exit points from which mineral commodities are transported to a port for exportation, finally traded for export, where it completes its conversion into money-capital. In this sense, anti-mining and mining struggles in the Andes effectively block the expansion of the extractive mining frontier and obstruct the circuit of the TCC’s productive capital invested in mining. The indigenous peasantry is actually at the forefront of anti-systemic movements challenging the reproduction of global capitalism to defend their water, their lands, and their “collective self” from imperialist mining.








































---

[[i]](#_ednref1) Minera Yanacocha-Newmont label in this document to Minera Yanacocha SRL. A mining company constituted by Newmont Mining Company (51.35%) and Compañía Minas Buenaventura (43.65%). The International Finance Corporation also owns 5% of the shares of Minera Yanacocha (Arce 2015:148-49; Bebbington et al. 2007:180; De Echave et al. 2009). By the end of the first decade of the 21st century, Minera Yanacocha had already extracted 19 million ounces of gold valued at approximately 7 billion dollars (Arce 2015:145) from the mines of Cajamarca.

[[ii]](#_ednref2) The united front strategy is pointed out by José Carlos Mariátegui as a solution to the problem of organizing the vanguard of the labor movement. Following the claim of unity of the proletariat and in favor of the development of its class consciousness, Mariátegui (1924) offers a basic vindictive program for the unity of the vanguard of the proletariat in formation, fragmented not only by productive specialization but also by differentiation, ideology and affiliations within the Peruvian popular movement at the beginning of the 20th century. The unique front is _“a contingent, concrete, practical action”, “a solidary [class] attitude in the face of a concrete problem, in the face of an urgent need”_ motivated by the class solidarity of those who are committed to the development of the popular movement, and in this sense, they are aware of their historical duties and committed to the common, basic demands of the socialist program: _“The class movement, among us, is still very incipient, very limited, for us to think about breaking it up and splitting it. Before the hour arrives, inevitable perhaps, of a division, it is up to us to carry out a lot of common work, a lot of solidarity work. We have to undertake many long journeys together. It is up to us, for example, to arouse in the majority of the Peruvian proletariat, class consciousness and class feeling. This task belongs equally to socialists and trade unionists, to communists and libertarians. We all have the duty to sow seeds of renewal and spread classist ideas. We all have the duty to distance the proletariat from the yellow assemblies and the false 'representative institutions'. We all have the duty to fight against the attacks and the reactionary repressions. We all have the duty to defend the platform, the press and the proletarian organization. We all have a duty to uphold the claims of the enslaved and oppressed indigenous race. In the fulfillment of these historical duties, of these elementary duties, our paths will meet and join, whatever our ultimate goal may be”_ (Mariátegui 1924).

[[iii]](#_ednref3) The peasant nightwatch organizations (rondas campesinas) were created, initially, to defend themselves against rustling. However, its success in the fight against common crime in the hamlets of Cajamarca progressed until it organized a popular justice administration system that spread successfully since the 1970s in northern Peru, becoming institutionalized during the 90's (Gitlitz 2013). Progressively, the effectiveness of the peasants nightwatch organizations administering justice on the margins of the Peruvian state led them to integrate into the dynamics of mining struggles in defense of land, water, life and dignity of the people of Cajamarca (Pérez Mundaca 2012). The translation of the category “rondas campesinas” as peasant nightwatch organizations was influenced by the English translation made by Orin Starn (1999).

[[iv]](#_ednref4) The abbreviation PCP PR denoted a further institutionalized secession of Peruvian Communist Party which adopts the PR “Patria Roja” denomination. Also see: Navarro (2010).

[[v]](#_ednref5) As the first arrangement made by the popular and peasant organizations to develop their struggle for the defense of water against Minera Yanacocha-Newmont, the promulgation of the Celendín declaration in November 2010 was supported by 36 delegates from grassroots organizations of five provinces of Cajamarca. Furthermore, for the declaration of San Pablo in 2011, the Interprovincial Coordinator for the Defense of the Environment had the support of 250 delegates (Interview LM5 03/08/2014).

[[vi]](#_ednref6) Translated by the author.

[[vii]](#_ednref7) “Las Bambas is a joint venture project between the operator MMG (62.5%), a wholly owned subsidiary of Guoxin International Investment Co. Ltd (22.5%) and CITIC Metal Co. Ltd (15.0%)” (MMG Company 2022b).