Introduction
Giovanni Arrighi and Beverly J. Silver
A sea change of major proportions is taking place in the historical social system forming the modern world. Eric Hobsbawm calls the 1970s and 1980s “decades of universal or global crisis,” the closing phase of his Short Twentieth Century (1914-91). In his view, the collapse of communist regimes “produced an enormous zone of political uncertainty, instability, chaos and civil war.” Worse still, it “also destroyed the . . . system that had stabilized international relations for some forty years . . . and revealed the precariousness of the domestic political systems that had essentially rested on that stability” (1994, 9-10).
The basic units of politics themselves, the territorial, sovereign and independent “nation-states,” including the oldest and stablest, found themselves pulled apart by the forces of supranational or transnational economy, and by the infranational forces of secessionist regions and ethnic groups. Some of these—such is the irony of history— demanded the outdated and unreal status of miniature sovereign “nation-states” for themselves. The future of politics was obscure, but its crisis at the end of the Short Twentieth Century was patent. (Hobsbawm, 1994, 10-n)
Equally patent, was a crisis of the rationalist and humanist assumptions, shared by liberal capitalism and communism, “on which
modern society had been founded since the Moderns won their famous battle against the Ancients in the early eighteenth century” (Hobsbawm, 1994, n). In a similar vein, Immanuel Wallerstein has claimed that the year 1989 marks “the end of a politico-cultural era— an era of spectacular technological achievement—in which the slogans of the French Revolution were seen by most people to reflect inevitable historical truth, to be realized now or in the near future.” Like Hobsbawm, Wallerstein situates the upheavals of 1989 in the context of the escalating, self-reinforcing disorder of the preceding two decades. But in contrast to Hobsbawm, he interprets this disorder as a form of systemic chaos caused “by the fact that contradictions of the [world capitalist] system have come to the point where none of the mechanisms for restoring the normal functioning of the system can work effectively any longer” (Wallerstein, 1995a, 1, 268).
As such, the present crisis is taken to mark the end, not just of the particular politico-cultural era launched by the Enlightenment and the French Revolution, but also of the modern world system that came into existence in the “long” sixteenth century. “Just as [the modern world-system] came into existence five centuries ago in Europe as the end point of the unfolding of the ‘crisis of feudalism,’ so this historical system, which now covers the globe and whose technical-scientific achievements go from triumph to triumph, is in systemic crisis” (Wallerstein, 1982., 11). Starting from different premises, James Rosenau concurs with this assessment. In his view, the parameters that have framed action in the international system for several centuries are being transformed so fundamentally today “as to bring about the first turbulence in world politics since comparable shifts culminated in the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648” (Rosenau, 1990, 10).
Whatever era is thought to be ending—the Cold War era, the longer era of “liberalism” and the Enlightenment, or the even longer era of the system of national states—-uncertainty is seen as engulfing the present and the foreseeable future. “As the citizens of the fin de siécle tapped their way through the global fog that surrounded them, into the third millennium,” remarks Hobsbawm (1994, 558-59), “all they knew for certain was that an era of history had ended. They knew very little else.”
Some even thought that not just an era, but history itself had ended. And they thought it had ended not with the crisis, but with the final triumph of liberal capitalism. With the collapse of Communism,
declared Francis Fukuyama, “liberal democracy remains the only coherent aspiration that spans different regions and cultures around the globe.” Two generations ago, “many reasonable people could foresee a radiant socialist future in which private property and capitalism had been abolished. . . . Today, by contrast, we have trouble imagining a world that is radically better than our own, or a future that is not essentially democratic and capitalist” (1992, xiii, 46).
Conceived within Reagan’s State Department, the original version of this declaration (Fukuyama, 1989) found immediate echo and application in the vision of a “new world order” that President Bush evoked in confronting Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait. The spectacular U.S./UN victory in the Gulf War gave credence to the idea that a new world order was in the making. Soon, however, that idea came to be seen, in John A. Hall’s words, “as a sick joke” in the light of widespread and escalating ethnic violence. T^e dictum of the Australian historian Geoffrey Bainey that “recurrent optimism is a vital prelude to war” seemed once again to be borne out by the facts (Hall, 1996, xii).
Four Controversies on the Future of
the World Political Economy
The purpose of this book is to dissipate at least some of the “global fog” that surrounds us by investigating the dynamics of systemic change in two earlier periods of transformation of the modern world that in key respects resemble the present. If the present period, as we shall argue, is one of decline and crisis of U.S. world hegemony, then it shares important analogies with the two previous periods of world- hegemonic transition—the transition from Dutch to British world hegemony in the eighteenth century and the transition from British to U.S. world hegemony in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Comparing the similarities and differences between these two completed transitions will shed light on the dynamics of current transformations.
Four interrelated controversies frame our inquiry. The first is the changing balance of power among states, and in particular, whether a new hegemonic state is likely to emerge. The second concerns the balance of power between states and business organizations, and in particular, whether “globalization” has irremediably undermined the
power of states. The third concerns the power of subordinate groups, and in particular, whether we are in the midst of an unstoppable “race to the bottom” in conditions of work and life. The fourth concerns the changing balance of power between Western and non-Western civilizations, and in particular, whether we are reaching the end of five centuries of Western dominance in the modern world system.
Each chapter analyzes the two past hegemonic transitions with one of these four issues in mind. We should thus first lay out in some detail the four controversies about the present that inspire our investigation of the past. In the second part of this introduction, we will clarify the central concepts and theoretical framework on which our investigation is based. In the conclusion, we will address these controversial issues with the new insights gained from our journey into the past.
The Geography of World Power
There is widespread debate and uncertainty about whether a new world-hegemonic state is emerging, and if so, which state will play that role. As Robert Gilpin (1996, 2) notes, “[t]here is no consensus on who in fact really won the Cold War, if indeed anyone did.” Candidates put forward by different analysts include the United States, a united Europe, and Japan, while still others claim that all states have lost power vis-á-vis supranational economic and political organizations.
Assessments of the global power of the United States in the wake of the demise of its Soviet rival vary widely.
“Now is the unipolar moment,” a triumphalist commentator crows.
“There is but one first-rate power and no prospect in the immediate future of any power to rival it.” But a senior U.S. foreign policy official demurs: “We simply do not have the leverage, we don’t have the influence, the inclination to use military force. We don’t have the money to bring the kind of pressure that will produce positive results any time soon.” (Ruggie, 1994, 553)
Nor does any agreement exist on who, if not the United States, has the leverage, influence, and money to bring the kind of pressure that produces positive results. In 1992, Lester Thurow prognosticated that the integration of the European Common Market on January 1, 1993, would mark the beginning of a new economic contest, in place of the old contest between capitalism and communism. In the new contest,
“[a]s the world’s largest market, the House of Europe will be writing the rules of world trade in the twenty-first century and the rest of the world will simply have to learn to play their economic game” (1992, 24-25; for a similar assessment, see Burstein, 1991, 11-12).
And yet, come January 1993, Europeans saw things in an altogether different light. Writing in London’s Sunday Times, Martin Jaques described Europe as “a continent in decline” that “must adjust to a less exalted position” (as quoted in Dicken and Oberg, 1996, 102). Four years later, the very process of European economic integration seemed to bear out the gloomier view.
With Europe staring at monumental structural economic problems ranging from 20 percent youth unemployment to the escalating costs of supporting an aging population, the timing of monetary union could hardly be worse. At best the political maneuvering over currency integration will serve as a distraction, delaying the wrenching changes needed to make Europe more competitive in the global economy. At worst it will set back the general cause of European unity by creating a huge political backlash against integration if economic conditions worsen soon after the euro is introduced. (Passell, 1997, Dz)
The extent of Japanese world power is equally unclear. Japan’s influence in world politics seems to have peaked shortly before the collapse of the USSR in the wake of the drastic revaluation of the yen vis- a-vis the U.S. dollar engineered by the Group of Seven (G-7) at the 1985 Plaza meeting. Aimed at containing U.S. trade deficits, the revaluation led instead to a seemingly irresistible ascent of “Japanese money” in financial and real estate markets around the world. Japanese banks came to dominate international asset rankings and Japanese institutional investors set the pace in the U.S. treasuries market. “On Wall Street and in the City of London, and around the seminar tables of the world’s finest graduate schools, there was a new, self-confident presence that no one could ignore” (Nakao, 1995, 1). This self-confident presence, along with the takeover of American assets of great symbolic value, such as the Rockefeller Center, Columbia Pictures, the Seattle Mariners, and much of downtown Los Angeles, gave rise in the United States “to dark warnings that decisions about the country’s future would be made in Tokyo, not New York and Washington” (Sanger, 1997a). Earlier prognostications of an “emerging Japanese superstate” (Kahn, 1970) or of “Japan as number one” (Vogel, 1979) seemed to be right on the mark.

In the short span of seven years, however, these “dark warnings” appeared “almost laughable.” If anything, the Japanese “exerted too little control over their [U.S.] acquisitions” and “took a multi-billion dollar bath on most of their investments” (Sanger, 1997a). Losses on Japanese foreign investments due to movements in exchange rates were even greater (Hale, 1995, 148). Partly as a result of these losses, at the beginning of 1990 prices on the Tokyo stock exchange collapsed, losing almost 55 percent of their value by the end of 1992 (Japan Almanac, 1997). Soon after the crash of 1990,
the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait sparked the Gulf crisis and exposed Japan’s political weakness. Even when war broke out early in 1991, the Japanese government was incapable of taking an independent line and once again fell in behind the leadership of the United States. Japan, it seemed, was a first class economy but third-rate in politics. (Nakao, 1995, 1)
The difficulties involved in identifying an unambiguously “strong state” in the post-Cold War era have led some analysts to argue that the power of all states is declining under the impact of intensifying economic integration. This brings us to the second controversy this book will focus on.
The Power of States versus the Power of Capital
The opening salvo in a renewed debate about the relationship between states and capitalism was Charles Kindleberger’s claim that the “nation-state” is “just about through as an economic unit” because of the emergence of a system of transnational corporations that neither owe loyalty, nor feel at home in any country (1969, 297; see also Hymer and Rowthorn, 1970, 88-91; Vernon, 1971; Barnet and Muller, 1974, 15-16; Sklar, 1976). It was some twenty years later, however, that the thesis of a general disempowerment of states by supranational economic forces gained widespread currency under the name of “globalization” (see, among others, Dicken, 1992; Ohmae, 1990; Skiair, 1991; Reich, 1992; Barnet and Cavanagh, 1994; Horsman and Marshall, 1994; Waters, 1995). In the intervening period, the expansion of the overseas operations of multinational corporations set off a process of global financial expansion and integration that acquired a momentum of its own and became the strongest piece of evidence in the armory of advocates of the globalization thesis.
According to Fred Bergsten, by the 1995 Halifax meeting of the G-7, the “immense flow of private capital [had] intimidated the officials from any effort to counter them.” After quoting Bergsten, Erik Peterson wonders whether those flows can be countered at all and speaks of a “coming hegemony of global markets.” As the “competition for global capital” intensifies, deterritorialized market forces (primarily business organizations but also some individuals) place increasingly tighter constraints on the economic policies of even the largest nations, the United States included. “They will also have an impact on the U.S. capacity to carry out effective security and foreign policies abroad and will determine the extent to which Washington can maintain its world leadership role” (Peterson, 1995, 111-13).
To return to our first controversial issue, advocates of the globalization thesis implicitly maintain that no state or group of states really won the Cold War because owners of mobile capital without allegiance to any specific state did. In the emerging situation, private credit-rating agencies like Moody’s Investors Services wield an influence that some commentators have compared to that of military superpowers. Commenting on the markdown of Mexico’s bonds that precipitated the 1994-95 Mexican financial crisis, Thomas Friedman ventured the hyperbole that we may be living again in a two- superpower world: “There is the U.S. and there is Moody’s. The U.S. can destroy a country by leveling it with bombs; Moody’s can destroy a country by downgrading its bonds” (quoted in Cohen, 1996, 282).
The globalization thesis of a general disempowerment of states vis-á-vis non-territorial, supranational, or transnational economic forces has not gone unchallenged, even in its less exaggerated forms. Few question the increasing magnitude and speed of capital flows across national boundaries. But many question the idea that this increase constitutes a qualitatively new or irreversible development in state-capital relations.
Some critics have pointed out that states have been active participants in the process of integration and deregulation of nationally segmented and publicly regulated financial markets. Moreover, this active participation occurred under the aegis of neoliberal doctrines of the minimalist state that were themselves propagated by particular states— most notably Britain under Margaret Thatcher and the United States under Ronald Reagan. Since state support and encouragement have been indispensable to the process of globalization, states are said to
have the power to reverse the process if they so choose (for different versions of this criticism, see Block, 1990; Sobel, 1994; Helleiner, 1994, 1997; Hirst and Thompson, 1992., 1996; Weiss, 1997).
To be sure, even if it originated in state action, globalization may have acquired a momentum that makes its reversal by states impossible or undesirable because of the costs involved (Goodman and Pauly, 1993; Pauly, 1995). However, there is no agreement among analysts on the extent to which globalization, whether reversible or not, actually constrains state action (Cohen, 1996, 2.80-93). Some even interpret it as the expression of the further empowerment of the United States. Indeed, various aspects of the seemingly global triumph of Americanism that ensued from the demise of the USSR are themselves widely perceived as signs of globalization. The most widely recognized signs are the global hegemony of U.S. popular culture and the growing importance of agencies of world governance that are influenced disproportionately by the United States and its closest allies, such as the UN Security Council, NATO, the G-7, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the International Bank of Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), and the World Trade Organization (WTO). Less widely recognized but also significant is the ascendance of a new legal regime in international business transactions dominated by U.S. law firms and Anglo-American conceptions of business law (Sassen, 1996, 12-2.1; see also Gill, 1990; Skiair, 1991).
The thesis that globalization disempowers states has also been challenged by critics who focus on the longer-term aspects of the phenomenon and see much déja vu in the alleged novelties of recent changes in state-capital relations. Wallerstein has gone as far as to argue that the basic relationship between states and capital has remained the same throughout capitalist history, with “transnational corporations ... maintaining today the same structural stance vis-á-vis states as did all their global predecessors, from the Fuggers to the Dutch East India Company to nineteenth-century Manchester manufacturers” (Wallerstein, 1995c, 24-25). More common is the contention that the transformations that go under the rubric of “globalization” originate in the nineteenth century. “If the theorists of globalization mean that we have an economy in which each part of the world is linked by markets sharing close to real-time information,” claim Paul Hirst and Grahame Thompson, “then that began not in the 1970s but in the 1870s” (1996, 9-10).
Financial and other major markets were closely integrated once the system of international submarine telegraph cables was in place and in a way not fundamentally different from the satellite-linked and computer-controlled markets of today. Indeed, the difference between an international economy in which market information travelled by sailing ship and one in which it is transmitted by electricity is really one of kind. Commentators sometimes forget that today’s open world economy is not unique. (Hirst and Thompson, 1992, 366)
After surveying the evidence, Robert Zevin concludes that “every available description of financial markets in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries suggests that they were more fully integrated than they were before or have been since” (1992, 51-52). Indeed, toward the end of this earlier wave of financial globalization, in 1920, Moody’s already rated bonds issued by about fifty governments—a number that declined rapidly in the wake of the Great Depression and the Second World War and returned only recently to comparable levels (Sassen, 1996, 43).
These analogies between the present period of globalization and the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth-century period have led some to question whether the present trend toward an unregulated world market economy is as unstoppable as advocates of the globalization thesis maintain. This question has recently been raised by one of the leading figures of cosmopolitan high finance, the Hungarian-born George Soros. In comparing the present age of triumphant laissez-faire capitalism with the similar age of a century ago, Soros finds the earlier age, if anything, more stable than the present, because of the sway of the gold standard and the presence of an imperial power (Britain) prepared to dispatch gunboats to faraway places to maintain the system. Yet the system broke down under the impact of the two world wars and the intervening rise of “totalitarian ideologies.” Today, in contrast, the United States is reluctant to be the policeman of the world “and the main currencies float and crush against each other like continental plates,” making the breakdown of the present regime much more likely (1997, 48).
Our global open society lacks the institutions and mechanisms necessary for its preservation, but there is no political will to bring them into existence. I blame the prevailing attitude, which holds that the unhampered pursuit of self-interest will bring about an eventual international equilibrium. ... As things stand, it does not take very much imagination to realize that the global open society that prevails at present is likely to prove a temporary phenomenon. (Soros, 1997, 53-54)
In short, the phoenix of private high finance has undoubtedly risen from the ashes of its destruction in the 1930s and 1940s. But whether it can rule the roost without the support of strong states more effectively than it has in the past—as implied by Peterson’s idea of a “coming hegemony of global markets”—remains in dispute. Equally controversial is the question of whether and how globalization and the attendant transformation of relations between states and capital have affected the social, political, and economic power of subordinate groups.
States, Capital, and the Social Power of Subordinate Groups A staple argument of the literature on globalization is that the increasing geographical mobility and volatility of capital is creating a “race to the bottom” in wages and working conditions as the world’s workers are brought into competition in a single labor market. Although workers in low-wage countries may temporarily benefit from the competition, the hyper-mobility of productive and finance capital makes the threat of “capital flight” realistic and palatable everywhere. The result is an overall decline in the capacity of workers to protect and advance their interests (see, among others, Frobel et al, 1980; Godfrey, 1986, 28; Ross and Trachte, 1990; Brecher, 1994/95; Bonacich et al., 1994, 365-73; Appelbaum, 1996).
Charles Tilly agrees that workers are facing a “devastating reversal” of the secular trend of expanding rights that began in the midnineteenth century. But rather than linking the weakening of labor directly to an increase in global economic competition, he emphasizes the intermediate role played by globalization’s impact on state capacities. Defining globalization as “an increase in the geographical range of locally consequential social interactions, especially when the increase stretches a significant proportion of all interactions across international or intercontinental limits” (for a similar definition, see Giddens, 1990, 64), he identifies four waves of globalization over the past millennium (in the thirteenth, sixteenth, nineteenth, and late twentieth centuries). He then contrasts the impact on state capacities of the current wave of globalization with that of the previous nineteenthcentury wave. Whereas during the nineteenth century states (in fact, European and other Western states on which Tilly’s contentions are based) acquired enhanced capacities for action, today states are losing the capacity to monitor and control stocks and flows, and therefore to
pursue effective social policies. For Tilly, workers’ rights have been enforced by national states; hence, as “states decline, so do workers’ rights” (Tilly, 1995, 1-4, 14-22).
Tilly argues that all citizens’ rights have been guaranteed by states, hence the current weakening of states threatens not only workers’ rights, but all democratic rights. John Markoff has similarly identified the increasing power of transnational entities as a major challenge to democracy. “Although more people in the mid-1990s are living under national governments with some claim to democracy than at any other point in the two centuries of modern democratic history, the actual power of those states may be slipping away, passing to . . . emerging transnational structures,” which are themselves not particularly democratic. Formally democratic governments in much of the world are likely to make key economic and social policy decisions with “an eye at least as much on pleasing the International Monetary Fund as appealing to an electorate.” For Markoff, “the challenge of recreating democracy in the emerging world of transnational decision-making” can only be met by the organization of transnational democratic movements capable of extracting “concessions from the new holders of transnational power” (Markoff, 1996, 132-35). Tilly concurs on the direction of the solution, but is more pessimistic, at least in the short run, that this will happen (1995, 22).
The contention that the weakening of states is the root cause of the weakening of labor and democracy has been challenged on a number of grounds that parallel the debates reviewed in the previous section. Thus, some have argued that the current organization of the international economy is a constructed outcome of political negotiations and conflicts, rather than an independent force. The current “high degree of freedom for international capital flows is not a necessary and inevitable feature of a world economy.” If the policies of the politically powerful change, globalization can be reversed (Block, 1990,16-18). From this point of view, the rhetoric of globalization veils corporate responsibility for massive layoffs (Gordon, 1996, 200-203) or governmental responsibility for the massive redistribution of benefits from labor to capital (Tabb, 1997; see also Piven, 1995; Block, 1996).
Others have challenged the causal link from weakened states to weakened subordinate groups by challenging the degree to which we are in a qualitatively new era of history. Wallerstein advanced his
claim that the basic relationship between states and capital has remained unchanged since the sixteenth century (see above) in direct response to Tilly’s contention that state power is now being undermined by transnational corporations. And Aristide Zolberg has criticized Tilly for disregarding the “dialectical relation” that has linked national economic policy to the international political economy since at least the nineteenth century (Zolberg, 1995, 33-34).
For Zolberg, the weakening of labor is not the dependent but the independent “variable” in explaining the current labor-unfriendly global environment. Building on Polanyi (1957), Zolberg argues that in the first half of the twentieth century, the “dysfunctional effects of the [unregulated international] market economy” provoked a series of disasters, as well as strong movements of self-protection (most importantly, militant labor movements). Drawing lessons from this experience, the leaders of the postwar world order created international institutions, most notably the Bretton Woods system, that “were designed quite deliberately to be relatively labor-friendly.” The effectiveness of state-sponsored efforts to promote social security and welfare at the national level in the 1950s and 1960s was premised on this “unprecedented benevolent environment” at the global level. But that benevolent environment was itself created in response to the unprecedented social power of workers in Western countries at the end of the Second World War (Zolberg, 1995, 33"34)-
The post-1970 change from a labor-friendly to a labor-unfriendly international regime is not due to the weakening of states, Zolberg maintains, but to the structural weakening of the working class itself with the advent of “post-industrial society.”
Much as the advent of industrial capitalism brought about conditions that fostered the creation of the distinctive social formation we term “working class,” so the waning of these conditions undermines its continued existence. . . . [T]he “workers” to whose struggles we owe the “rights of labor” are rapidly disappearing and today constitute a residual endangered species. (Zolberg, 1995, 2.8)
Despite their disagreement on the causes, both Tilly and Zolberg agree that labor is being weakened. Yet this contention itself is at odds with a rapidly growing literature exploring the relationship between class formation and transformations of the global political economy (van der Fiji, 1984; Cox, 1987; Gill, 1990, 1993; Gill and Law, 1988;
Gill and Mittelman, 1997; Hettne, 1995; Rupert, 1995; Mittelman, 1996; Robinson, 1996). Most of this literature focuses on the formation of a transnational capitalist class with its own strategic class consciousness. This process is generally interpreted as imposing new constraints on national governments and labor organizations. But the efforts and activities of this transnational capitalist class are themselves conceived as a response to the constraints imposed on capital by strong (not weak) labor movements. Moreover, like Zolberg, some of these studies (most notably Mittelman, 1996; Gill and Mittelman, 1997) invoke Polanyi’s contention that global movements toward the creation of a system of self-regulating markets inevitably calls forth spontaneous, global countermovements of resistance against the disruption of established social relations and practices. Unlike Zolberg, however, they see this countermovement coming into action, not just in response to the sway of laissez-faire capitalism in the 1880s, but also in response to its attempted revival in the 1980s.
By Zolberg’s own account, it took sixty years—from the 1880s to the 1940s—for the earlier countermovement to produce “laborfriendly” results at the level of the global political economy. What is to prevent the (countermovement) responses to the current revival of laissez-faire from producing comparable results at the global level twenty or thirty years from now? And even now, what are we to make of the fact that in mid-1997 nominally working-class parties—albeit with “foggy” ideas about how to cope with globalization—were in the governing coalitions of thirteen out of fifteen states in the European Union?
The issue of whether or not globalization is disempowering subordinate groups becomes even more controversial as soon as we broaden our horizon beyond the wealthy countries of the West, on whose experience Tilly’s and Zolberg’s contentions are almost exclusively based. Various studies have contrasted the declining militancy and social power of labor in deindustrializing wealthy countries with the “manufacturing of militance” (Seidman, 1994) in less wealthy but rapidly industrializing countries, such as Brazil, South Africa, and South Korea (see also Silver, 1995; Evans, 1995, 227-29; Markoff, 1996, 20-31; Moody, 1997). In a similar vein, Lourdes Beneria (1995, 45—52-) has pointed out that the current transformations in the global organization of production may be creating new rights at the same time that old rights are undermined. Even where new labor
movements have not emerged, “the sheer fact of rural women’s migration to industrial employment [in export-processing zones] may foster their individual rights and autonomy and release them from oppressive patriarchal practices” (Beneria, 1995, 48; see also Lim, 1983, 1990; Ong, 1987). Moreover, the creation of a single world labor market is leading to growing “pressures towards recognition of workers’ rights” in such forums as the Uruguay Round negotiations of GATT (Beneria, 1995, 48).
But whether and to what extent workers’ and citizens’ rights can continue to expand across time and space is also debatable. Waller- stein contends that the expansion of workers’ and citizens’ rights since the mid-nineteenth century was itself premised on the exclusion of the majority of the world’s population from those rights and benefits. The expansion of rights originated in an attempt by Western elites to deal with an increasingly numerous and militant working class within their own countries by means of a strategy of cooptation. A triple package was offered—“the suffrage, the welfare state, and a double nationalism (of the states and of the White world, that is racism).” The strategy “was enormously successful in transforming the ‘dangerous classes’ [of the West] into a ‘responsible opposition’ with syndical claims to a share of the pie.” But the strategy became too expensive when it was expanded to include the promise of “economic development” in the non-Western world. Allowing the non-Western world “to share in the pie was simply too costly for a capitalist world-economy. One could cut in several-hundred-million Western workers and still make the system profitable. But if one cut in several billion Third World workers, there would be nothing left for further capital accumulation” (1995c, 25).
Indeed, by the 1970s it became clear that world capitalism could not accommodate “the combined demands of the Third World (for relatively little per person but for a lot of people) and the Western working class (for relatively few people but for quite a lot per person)” (Wallerstein, 1995c, 25). The trend toward increasing redistribution and equality was halted. New class divides are being drawn, which in core countries, Wallerstein predicts, will increasingly overlap with racial divides.
We will have social structures in Europe and North America ... in which the “working class” will be disproportionately composed of
non-White workers, probably outside the trade-union structures, and even more probably without basic political and social rights. At the same time, the children and grandchildren of today’s union members will be “middle class”—maybe unionized, some doing well, and others less well (and thereupon more likely to be engaged in rightwing politics). . . . [W]e will have returned to the pre-r848 situation in which, within the traditional loci of the liberal state ... the “workers” will be poorly paid and outside the realm of political and social rights. Western workers will once again have become the “dangerous classes,” but their skin color will have changed, and the class struggle will be a race struggle. The problem of the twenty-first century will be the problem of the color line. (Wallerstein, 1995c, 26-27; emphasis in the original)
A Changing Balance of Civilizational Power
The prediction that “the problem of the color line” would be the problem of the coming century was of course first made by William E. Burghardt Du Bois in 1900 (Du Bois, 1989). Du Bois’s prediction concerned the coming revolt of the “darker races” of Asia and Africa against the “lighter races” of the West, which had just completed the military conquest of the world. “It was,” in Geoffrey Barraclough’s words, “a remarkable prophecy.”
When the twentieth century opened, European power in Asia and Africa stood at its zenith; no nation, it seemed, could withstand the superiority of European arms and commerce. Sixty years later only the vestiges of European domination remained. Between 1945 and i960 no less than forty countries . . . revolted against colonialism and won their independence. Never before in the whole of human history had so revolutionary a reversal occurred with such rapidity. The change in the position of the peoples of Asia and Africa and in their relations with Europe was the surest sign of the advent of a new era, and when the history of the first half of the twentieth century— which, for most historians, is still dominated by European wars and European problems . . . comes to be written in a longer perspective, there is little doubt that no single theme will prove to be of greater importance than the revolt against the west. (1967, 153-54)
In Wallerstein’s scheme of things, the impact of this revolt was neutralized in the Cold War era by the promise of a generalized “catching up” with Western standards of wealth and welfare. But the very failure of the modernization experience is creating the conditions for a resumption of the revolt in the form of a “racialized” class struggle within the wealthy countries of the West themselves. Starting from
altogether different premises, Samuel Huntington (1993, 1996) also anticipates a new revolt against the West in the form, not of a racial- ized class struggle, but of a “clash of civilizations” brought about by the success of modernization in empowering at least some of the peoples and governments of non-Western civilizations.
For Huntington (1993, 39“4°), as for Fukuyama, the Cold War has ended in an indisputable triumph of the leading states of Western capitalism, first and foremost the United States. Unlike Fukuyama, however, Huntington sees no final triumph of Western liberal democracy. On the contrary, he sees the nearly absolute Western dominance of international institutions as the onset of a new phase in the evolution of conflict in the modern world. Conflicts among states since the Peace of Westphalia, he says,
were primarily conflicts within Western civilization, “Western Civil Wars,” as William Lind has labeled them. This was as true of the Cold War as it was true of the world wars and the earlier wars of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. With the end of the Cold War, international politics moves out of its Western phase, and its centerpiece becomes the interaction between the West and non-Western civilizations and among non-Western civilizations. (Huntington, 1993, 22-23)
Intercivilizational conflicts arise in part because Western dominance of the global political economy fosters resentment, and the more so as it becomes the vehicle of the propagation of Western interests, ideas, and values. But the most important force behind the coming clash of civilizations is the change in the civilizational balance of power entailed by the continuing modernization of the non-Western world. Huntington does not construe this tendency as posing any immediate threat to Western dominance. He nonetheless singles out “the sustained expansion of China’s military power and its means to create military power” as “|c]entrally important to the development of counter-West military capabilities.” Taken in conjunction with China’s disposition to export arms and weapons technology to Middle Eastern states, this tendency is seen as creating a “Confucian-Islamic connection” that can pose a serious challenge to Western dominance. To meet this challenge, Huntington advocates a three-pronged Western strategy aimed at containing and eventually accommodating the growing power of non-Western civilizations: (1) greater cooperation and unity within the West; (2) maintenance of Western military capabilities, as if
the Cold War had never ended; and (3) greater attention to the religious and philosophical assumptions underlying other civilizations (Huntington, 1993, 26, 40-41, 47-49).
Huntington’s thesis has been subjected to a barrage of criticisms aimed as much at the ill-defined nature of the analytical constructs on which it is based, as at the danger that its predictions will turn into a self-fulfilling prophecy (for early responses, see Huntington et al., 1993; for a critical review of the debate, see Alker, 1995). As John Ikenberry has observed, the image of a Western civilization that separates “us” from the “rest” provides a ready and easily grasped ideological substitute for the “glue” that held together the Atlantic alliance in the Cold War era. Just as the alliance was presented in the Cold War era as a defensive device against communist aggression, so its renewal is now presented as a defensive device against a coming clash of civilizations driven by the success of Chinese modernization. But “to other powers like China and Japan the circling of the Western wagons will look like a declaration of a new Cold War” (1997, 163).
The implication of this criticism is that Chinese modernization poses no significant threat to U.S. and Western interests or, if it does, that there are other, more effective or more desirable means of meeting the threat than declaring a new Cold War on an ill-defined “other.” But it is precisely on these two issues that observers and analysts are most divided. To some, the threat posed by the success of Chinese modernization in recent years is far greater than the threat posed by Chinese communism in the Cold War era.
The irony in Sino-American relations is that when China was in the grip of ideological Maoism and displayed such ideological ferocity that Americans believed it to be dangerous and menacing, it was actually a paper tiger, weak and virtually without global influence. Now that China has shed the trappings of Maoism and embarked on a pragmatic course of economic development and global trade, it appears less threatening but it is in fact acquiring the wherewithal to back its global ambitions and interests with real power. (Bernstein and Munro, 1997, 22)
To others, the real “paper tiger” is the East Asian “economic miracle,” of which the Chinese is the latest episode. For Paul Krugman, the most forceful proponent of this claim, the reliance of East Asian economic expansion in the 1980s on heavy investment and big shifts of labor from farms into factories, rather than on productivity gains,
makes it resemble the economic expansion of the Warsaw Pact nations in the 1950s. “From the perspective of the year 2010, current projections of Asian supremacy extrapolated from recent trends may well look almost as silly as i96os-vintage forecasts of Soviet industrial supremacy did from the perspective of the Brezhnev years” (Krugman, 1994, 78).
But a Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS) study finds that “the eight-percent plus average annual income growth set by several [East] Asian economies since the late 1960s is unique in the 130 years of recorded economic history” (Union Bank of Switzerland, 1996, 1). Moreover, what distinguishes most clearly the East Asian economic expansion of the 1980s from that of Warsaw Pact nations in the 1950s is the extraordinary advance of East Asia in global finance. The Japanese share of the total assets of Fortune’s top fifty banks in the world increased from 18 percent in 1970, to 27 percent in 1980, to 48 percent in 1990 (Ikeda, 1996). As for foreign exchange reserves, the East Asian share of the top ten central banks’ holdings increased from 10 percent in 1980 to 50 percent in 1994 (Japan Almanac, 1993 and 1997).
Those who take the East Asian economic miracle seriously, however, strongly disagree on what kind of threat, if any, it poses to U.S. and Western interests. The most influential view, as expressed by Joseph Nye in a Department of Defense report he supervised and in a supporting essay, concurs with Huntington that ultimately the threat is military and that China’s economic expansion is the most worrisome development of the post-Cold War era. Like Huntington, Nye’s main policy prescription is to maintain U.S. military capabilities in general, and their deployment in East Asia in particular, as if the Cold War had never ended (Nye, 1995, 91-95).
This prescription and the analysis on which it is based have been challenged on the ground that they grossly overestimate China’s capacity to match U.S. sea or air power in the foreseeable future (Nathan and Ross, 1997). More fundamentally, Chalmers Johnson and E. B. Keehn (1995) charged that the analysis and prescription disregard the profound decline in the effectiveness of military might as a source of world power. In their view, after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, U.S. military power in the region experienced rapidly decreasing returns and eventual irrelevance. The United States “at best... fought to stalemate in the Korean War and lost the one in Vietnam.” More recently, the
closing of the two largest U.S. overseas bases, Clark Air Base and Subic Bay in the Philippines, “produced not even a shiver of instability,” while “[t]he most odious regime in postwar Asia, Pol Pot’s Khmer Rouge in Cambodia, was disposed of not by Americans but by Vietnamese communists” (1995, 103-4, in).
As U.S. military power waned, East Asian economic power waxed. Communist and nationalist militancy in the region, which U.S. militarism energized, began withering away in an embrace with indigenous capitalism. “Despite American whistling in the dark that foreigners’ taste for American movies, rock music, blue jeans, and McDonald’s hamburgers means that the United States is still their model, this intellectual battle is over. Some version of Asian capitalism lies in most nations’ future” (Johnson and Keehn, 1995, 112). According to David Howell, Chairman of Britain’s House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, even in Europe “Coca-colonization is yesterday’s story.” On the eve of the 1997-98 financial crisis, which burst the bubble of Western enthusiasm for East Asian economic models, he proclaimed that
The issue today ... is not the westernization of the east but the east- ernization of the West. Europeans are now debating how to draw on the techniques and financial power of Asia in order to shore up their uncompetitive economies and form alliances with the new Asian corporate giants. (1997, 164)
A pull of Eastern civilizations on Europeans is of course what started the formation and expansion of the modern world system some five hundred years ago. As William McNeill has noted, a major problem with Huntington’s thesis is that it disregards two basic facts of world history. One is that “contemporary civilizations have always interacted with one another, even across long distances.” The other is that, over time, the mutual borrowings and adaptations propagated by these encounters became increasingly pervasive and important in the expansion of human wealth and power.
At a time when each of the great Asian civilizations sought to minimize disturbing contacts with outsiders, Europeans continued fighting among themselves while exploring the rest of the world with an eager, restless greed for material gain and for intellectual understanding as well. As a result, the West expanded and transformed itself over and over again. (McNeill, 1997, 19, zt)
As McNeill himself underscored in another context, this ceaseless expansion and transformation of the West was embedded in “a selfreinforcing cycle in which [European] military organization sustained, and was sustained by, economic and political expansion at the expense of other peoples and polities of the earth” (1982, 143). Although this cycle was broken by the revolt against the West of the first half of the twentieth century, many of the conceptual frameworks with which we try to apprehend the world tacitly presume that the cycle is still in force. This indeed may be one of the reasons why we find it so difficult to identify the direction(s) of change in the contemporary global political economy. As Janet Abu-Lughod (1990, 281-82) put it, we may have become so fixated on “studying the persistence and evolution of the ‘modern’ world-system that we are unprepared to understand what we sense may be its break-up or at least its radical transformation.”
In concluding her study of the rise and demise of the thirteenthcentury Afroeurasian world-trading system, Abu-Lughod suggests that the decline of U.S. military power of the 1970s and early 1980s and the simultaneous rise of East Asian economic power of the 1980s may be a sign that “the old advantages that underlay the hegemony of the West are dissipating.” Under the emerging circumstances, “no single player has a spectacular advantage” and the supersession of Western supremacy by a new form of world conquest “is hard to imagine. ”
Rather it seems more likely that there will be a return to the relative balance of multiple centers exhibited in the thirteenth-century world system. But that would require a shift to different rules of the game, or at least an end to the rules Europe introduced in the sixteenth century. (Abu-Lughod, 1989, 370-71)
Abu-Lughod does not say what these rules might be and who would make and enforce them. Shortly after she finished her book, the Berlin wall came tumbling down, leading to contradictory claims that the new rules would be made in Washington, or in Brussels, or in Tokyo, or in the secrecy of corporate board rooms, silent electronic networks, and noisy market places, until Huntington came along summoning the circling of the Western wagons lest the Rest under Chinese leadership do to the West what the West has been doing to the Rest. While we wait for the dust to settle, Abu-Lughod’s suggestion that the future may bear some resemblance to a premodern past is as good as anybody else’s guess.
Hegemonic Transitions: Concepts for Analysis
To paraphrase Hobsbawm, there indeed seems to be little consensus on anything but the fact that an era of history has ended. There is no consensus on which state, if any, benefited most from the confrontation of the Cold War and is now poised to replace the United States as the dominant player in the global political economy. There is no consensus on whether the proliferation in the variety and number of multinational corporations and the formation of global financial markets is undermining state capacities and, if so, how generally and permanently. There is no consensus on whether the world’s working class is an endangered species or is simply changing color and the countries of its residence. There is no consensus on whether modernization is shoring up civilizational divides, melting them down, or restoring the intercivilizational balance of power of premodern times. Above all, there is no consensus on what kind of world order, if any, we can expect to emerge from the combination of whatever changes are actually occurring in the global configuration of power.
Hegemonic Transitions as Systemic Change
We may take the lack of consensus on the direction and meaning of present changes in the global political economy as a sign that we are in the midst of systemic change—that is, a process of radical reorganization of the modern world system that changes substantively the nature of the system’s components, the way in which these components relate to one another, and the way in which the system operates and reproduces itself. In times of systemic change, as Abu-Lughod has pointed out, “small localized conditions may interact with adjacent ones to create outcomes that might not otherwise have occurred, and large disturbances sometimes flutter to an end while minor ones may occasionally amplify wildly, depending upon what is happening in the rest of the system.” The “same-cause-yields-same-effects” logic that underlies much of our thinking about the world is ill-equipped to apprehend this kind of change, and we should instead draw inspiration from “chaos theory” (1989, 369).
In a similar vein, Rosenau resorts to the language of chaos theory in conceptualizing present changes in the global political economy as a “bifurcation”—a term coined almost a century ago by Henri Poincaré to designate the emergence of several solutions from a given solution
in systems of differential equations (Bergé, Pomeau, and Vidal, 1984, 271). In evoking this image, he underscores how the order that will eventually emerge out of the present turbulence in world politics is not inscribed in the parameters of the order that has broken down. But he also points out that there is an order within chaos. Just as physicists have used the concept of bifurcation “to uncover the order intrinsic to the breakdown of established patterns,” so we too should strive “to uncover the underlying patterns of the seemingly chaotic . . . world that has emerged to rival the state-centric world” (1990, 58).
Our investigation has sought clues as to what these underlying patterns might be in the present turbulence by uncovering underlying patterns in comparable past instances of systemic change. The result is a story of the expansion of the modern world system to its present global dimensions through a series of fundamental reorganizations. These reorganizations have occurred in periods of hegemonic transition defined as moments of change both in the leading agency of worldscale processes of capital accumulation and in the political-economic structures in which these processes are embedded.
The formation and expansion of the modern world system is thus conceived as proceeding, not along a single track laid some four to five hundred years ago, but through several switches to new tracks laid by specific complexes of governmental and business agencies. To borrow an expression from Michael Mann (1986, 28), these leading complexes—the Dutch complex in the seventeenth century, the British complex in the nineteenth century, and the U.S. complex in the twentieth century—have all acted as “tracklaying vehicles” (cf. Taylor, 1994, 27). In leading the system in a new direction, they also transformed it. Under Dutch leadership, the emergent system of European states was formally instituted by the Treaties of Westphalia. Under British leadership, the Eurocentric system of sovereign states moved to dominion globally. And under U.S. leadership, the system lost its Eurocentricity to further gain in reach and penetration (Arrighi, 1990b, 1994; Hopkins, 1990).
Leadership by a particular agency and a concomitant systemic transformation are equally essential attributes of the concept of world hegemony on which our investigation is based. As John Ruggie (1983) has pointed out in a critical assessment of Kenneth Waltz’s theory of international politics (1979), systemic theories like Waltz’s, or for that matter like Wallerstein’s, are important correctives of the fallacy involved in attempts to know a totality through the study of its parts. For totalities have properties of their own (“systemic properties”) that act, in Waltz’s words, “as a constraining and disposing force on the interacting units within it.” Systems, therefore, are themselves “productive” and not just the “product” of unit-level processes (as quoted in Ruggie, 1983, 263). In redressing the balance, however, systemic theories can easily go too far and conceive of unit-level processes as all product and not at all productive.
The problem with Waltz’s posture is that, in any social system, structural change itself ultimately has no source other than unit-level processes. By banning these from the domain of systemic theory, Waltz also exogenizes the ultimate source of systemic change. ... As a result, Waltz’s theory of “society” contains only a reproductive logic, but no transformational logic. (Ruggie, 1983, 285; emphasis in the original; see also Keohane and Nye, 1987)
Ruggie’s criticism of Waltz’s conception of international politics can also be leveled almost word for word at Wallerstein’s conception of hegemony in the modern system of sovereign states. According to this conception,
Hegemony in the interstate system refers to that situation in which the ongoing rivalry between the so-called “great powers” is so unbalanced that one power is truly primus inter pares; that is, one power can largely impose its rules and its wishes ... in the economic, political, military, diplomatic, and even cultural arenas. The material base of such power lies in the ability of enterprises domiciled in that power to operate more efficiently in all three major economic arenas—agro-industrial production, commerce and finance. The edge in efficiency of which we are speaking is one so great that these enterprises can not only outbid enterprises domiciled in other great powers in the world market in general, but quite specifically in very many instances within the home markets of the rival powers themselves. (Wallerstein, 1984, 38-39)
In all three instances—Dutch, British, and U.S.—hegemony is the outcome of long periods of “competitive expansion . . . which [result] in a particular concentration of economic and political power.” In the course of these competitive expansions, the rising hegemon acquires its decisive edge first in production, then in commerce, and then in finance. But hegemony is firmly secured only through victory in a thirtyyear-long climactic “world war”—the Thirty Years’ War from 1618 to 1648, the Napoleonic Wars from 1792 to 1815, and the long Eurasian
wars from 1914 to 1945. “The winner’s economic edge is expanded by the very process of the war itself, and the postwar interstate settlement is designed to encrust that greater edge and protect it against erosion” (Wallerstein, 1984, 39-44).
This postwar settlement consists of one form or another of “global liberalism” aimed at enforcing “the principle of the free flow of the factors of production (goods, capital and labor) throughout the worldeconomy.” Global liberalism serves the double purpose of buttressing the sway of the hegemonic power’s competitive edge, and “of delegitimizing the efforts of other state machineries to act against the economic superiority of the hegemonic power.” But global liberalism also “breeds its own demise” because it makes it more difficult for the hegemonic power to retard “the spread of technological expertise” to competing states, and because maintaining “uninterrupted production at a time of maximal global accumulation” involves “the creeping rise of real income of both the working strata and the cadres located in the hegemonic power.” Over time, these two tendencies undermine the competitive edge of the hegemonic power’s enterprises in production, then in commerce, and then in finance. The system thus reverts to a new long period of competitive expansion until another state manages to achieve the triple competitive advantage—in production, commerce, and finance—that defines hegemony (Wallerstein, 1984, 41, 45).
Figure 1 summarizes Wallerstein’s model of hegemonic cycles. The model—to paraphrase Ruggie’s praise of Waltz’s systemic theory—“is a welcome antidote to the prevailing superficiality of the proliferating literature on international transformation, in which the sheer momentum of processes sweeps the international polity along toward the next encounter with destiny” (1983, 2.85). But it is also vulnerable to the same criticism that Ruggie levels at Waltz, namely, that it exogenizes the ultimate source of systemic change. Particular complexes of governmental and business agencies become hegemonic in the course of competitive expansions by virtue of the efficiency of their actions relative to those of all other competing complexes. But which actions are relatively efficient is a mere reflection of structural properties of the world capitalist system on which they have no impact whatsoever. They are all product and not at all productive.
Whether and to what extent unit-level processes—such as the formation of particular complexes of governmental and business agencies and their actions—simply play out a script dictated by system-level
RIVALRY HEGEMONY RIVALRY
Figure i. Wallerstein’s hegemonic cycle.
properties or themselves write the script and thereby form and transform the system, is a question that ultimately can be settled only on empirical-historical grounds. It is indeed on these grounds that we have found Wallerstein’s model wanting. For our investigation has revealed that the rise of hegemonic powers in the modern world has not been the mere reflection of systemic properties. Systemic properties do act as powerful constraining and disposing forces on the selection of the states that become hegemonic. But in all instances, hegemony has also involved a fundamental reorganization of the system and a change in its properties.
World Hegemonies as Systemic Leadership and Governance Like a growing number of students of world politics and society (see, among others, Cox, 1983, 1987; Keohane, 1984a; Gill, 1986, 1993; Gill and Law, 1988; Rupert, 1995; Robinson, 1996), we have derived our concept of hegemony from Antonio Gramsci’s idea that
the supremacy of a social group manifests itself in two ways, as “domination” and as “intellectual and moral leadership.” A social group dominates antagonistic groups, which it tends to “liquidate,” or to subjugate perhaps even by armed force; it leads kindred or allied groups. (Gramsci, 1971, 57-58)
Whereas domination rests primarily on coercion, the leadership that defines hegemony rests on the capacity of the dominant group to present itself, and be perceived, as the bearer of a general interest.
It is true that the State is seen as the organ of one particular group, destined to create favorable conditions for the latter’s maximum expansion. But the development and expansion of the particular group are conceived of, and presented, as being the motor force of a universal expansion, a development of all the “national” energies. (Gramsci, 1971, 181-82.)
Hegemony is thus something more and different than domination pure and simple: it is the additional power that accrues to a dominant group by virtue of its capacity to lead society in a direction that not only serves the dominant group’s interests, but is also perceived by subordinate groups as serving a more general interest. It is the inverse of the notion of “power deflation” used by Talcott Parsons to designate situations in which governmental control cannot be exercised except through the widespread use or threat of force. If subordinate
groups have confidence in their rulers, systems of domination can be governed without resorting to force. But if that confidence wanes, they cannot (1964). By analogy, Gramsci’s notion of hegemony may be said to consist of the “power inflation” that ensues from the capacity of dominant groups to present with credibility their rule as serving not just their interests, but those of subordinate groups as well. When such credibility is lacking, we shall speak of “dominance without hegemony” (cf. Guha, 1992a, 231-32).
As long as we speak of leadership in a national context, as Gramsci does, there is little ambiguity about the fact that society as a whole, as defined by the jurisdiction of a particular state, is being led in a direction that enhances the power of the dominant group. But when we speak of leadership in an international context, the term is used to designate two quite different phenomena. On the one hand, the term is used to designate the fact that by virtue of its achievements, a dominant state becomes the “model” for other states to emulate and thereby draws them onto its own path of development (see in particu- -- lar Modelski, 1987; Modelski and Thompson, 1995). This may enhance the prestige and hence the power of the dominant state (Taylor, 1996). But to the extent that emulation is at all successful, it tends to counterbalance and hence deflate rather than inflate the power of the hegemon by bringing into existence competitors and reducing the “specialness” of the hegemon (Gilpin, 1981). This “leadership against the leader’s will,” as we shall call it, borrowing an expression from Joseph Schumpeter (1963, 89), is always present in hegemonic situations but does not in itself define a situation as hegemonic.
On the other hand, the term leadership is used to designate the — fact that a dominant state leads the system of states in a desired direc- — tion and, in so doing, is widely perceived as pursuing a general inter- _ est. Leadership in this sense inflates the power of the dominant state, .... and is what we shall take as the defining characteristic of world hegemonies. A general interest is, of course, more difficult to define at the level of a system of sovereign states than at the level of individual states. At the latter level, an increase in the power of a state vis-á-vis other states is an important component and in itself a measure of the successful pursuit of a general (that is, “national”) interest. But power in this sense cannot increase for the system as a whole, by definition.
A general interest for the system as a whole can nonetheless be identified by recasting in world-systems perspective Parsons’s distinction
between “distributive” and “collective” aspects of power. Distributive aspects of power refer to a zero-sum-game relationship whereby an agency can gain power only if other agencies lose some. Max Weber’s definition of power as “the probability that one actor within a social relationship will be in a position to carry out his own will despite resistance” (1978, 53) focuses on such distributive aspects of power. Collective aspects of power, in contrast, refer to a positive-sum-game relationship whereby cooperation among distinct agencies increases their power over third parties or over nature (Parsons, i960, 199-225).
The distinction between distributive and collective power drawn by Parsons with reference to social systems bounded by a single political jurisdiction holds also in social systems that encompass multiple political jurisdictions. In the latter systems, the general interest represented by a hegemonic agency cannot be defined in terms of changes in the distribution of power among political jurisdictions. But it can be defined in terms of an increase in the collective power over third parties or nature by the entire system’s dominant groups.
Generally speaking, claims to represent a general systemic interest so defined can be expected to become credible and thereby inflate the power of a would-be hegemonic state under two conditions. First, the dominant groups of this state must have developed the capacity to lead the system in the direction of new forms of interstate cooperation and division of labor that enable the system’s units to break out of what Waltz (1979, 108-9) has called “the tyranny of small decisions”—that is, to overcome the tendency of the separate states to pursue their national interest without regard for system-level problems that require system-level solutions. In short, there must be an effective “supply” of world-governance capabilities. And second, the system-level solutions offered by the would-be hegemon must address system-level problems that have become so acute as to create among the system’s extant or emergent dominant groups a deeply and widely felt “demand” for systemic governance. When these supply and demand conditions are simultaneously fulfilled, the would-be hegemonic state can play the role of “a surrogate of government” in promoting, organizing, and managing an expansion of the collective power of the system’s dominant groups (cf. Waltz, 1979, 196).
Our investigation focuses on processes that have recurrently created these two conditions in the modern system of sovereign states since its formal founding under Dutch hegemony in the mid-seventeenth
HEGEMONY HEGEMONIC TRANSITION NEW HEGEMONY
Figure 2. The dynamics of hegemonic transitions.
century. The model of hegemonic transition that has emerged from the investigation is summed up in figure 2. Like Wallerstein’s model, our model describes a hegemonic cycle. Unlike Wallerstein’s, however, it endogenizes systemic change.
In our model, systemic expansions are embedded in a particular hegemonic structure they tend to undermine. They are the outcome of the interplay of the two different kinds of leadership that jointly define hegemonic situations. Systemic reorganization promotes expansion by endowing the system with a wider or deeper division of labor and specialization of functions. Emulation provides the separate states with the motivational drive needed to mobilize energies and resources in the expansion.
There is always a tension between these two tendencies because a wider and deeper division of labor and specialization of functions involves cooperation among the system’s units, while emulation is based on and fosters their mutual competition. Initially, emulation operates in a context that is predominantly cooperative and thereby acts as an engine of expansion. But expansion increases what Emile Durkheim (1964, 115; 1984, 200-205) has called the “volume” and “dynamic density” of the system, that is, the number of socially relevant units that interact within the system and the number, variety, and velocity of transactions that link the units to one another. Over time, this increase in the volume and dynamic density of the system tends to intensify competition among the system’s units beyond the regulatory capacities of existing institutions. When that happens, the tyranny of small decisions regains the upper hand, the power of the hegemonic state experiences a deflation, and a hegemonic crisis sets in.
As figure 2 shows, hegemonic crises are chafacterized by three distinct, but closely related processes: the intensification of interstate and interenterprise competition; the escalation of social conflicts; and the interstitial emergence of new configurations of power. The form these processes take and the way they relate to one another in space and time vary from crisis to crisis. But some combination of the three processes can be detected in each of the two hegemonic transitions completed so far—from Dutch to British and from British to U.S. hegemony—as well as in the present transition from U.S. hegemony to a yet unknown destination. Moreover, differences in form and in spatio-temporal configuration notwithstanding, in all three hegemonic crises—Dutch, British, and U.S.—-the three processes have been
associated with a pattern we take as the most evident manifestation of the capitalist nature of the modern world system. This pattern is what we shall refer to as a systemwide financial expansion.
Hegemonic Crises and Financial Expansions
Systemwide financial expansions are the outcome of two complementary tendencies: an overaccumulation of capital and intense interstate competition for mobile capital. The first tendency creates what we may call the supply conditions of financial expansions, while the second creates their demand conditions.
The recurrence of financial expansions in the world capitalist system since its earliest origins in the city-states of Renaissance Italy was first noticed by Fernand Braudel, who underscored their supply conditions. Whenever the profits of trade and production accumulated “on a scale beyond the normal channels of investment, finance capitalism was ... in a position to take over and dominate, for a while at least, all the activities of the business world” (1984, 604). By reaching this stage, “every [major] capitalist development. . . seems ... to have announced its maturity.” Financial expansions are “a sign of autumn” (Braudel, 1984, 246).
Historically, Braudel’s financial expansions have always occurred in conjunction with an intensification in interstate competition for mobile capital. Braudel says nothing about such a competition, in spite of Weber’s observation that it constitutes “the world-historical distinctiveness of [the modern] era” (1978, 354). Whereas in premodern times the formation of world empires swept away freedoms and powers of the cities that constituted the main loci of capitalist expansion, in the modern era these loci came under the sway of “competing national states in a condition of perpetual struggle for power in peace or war. . . . The separate states had to compete for mobile capital, which dictated to them the conditions under which it would assist them to power.” This competitive struggle has created the largest opportunities for modern capitalism, “and as long as the national state does not give place to a world empire capitalism also will endure” (Weber, 1961, 249).
The occurrence of Braudel’s financial expansions in periods of particularly intense interstate competition for mobile capital is no mere historical accident. Rather, it is the outcome of a double tendency engendered by particularly rapid, extensive, and profitable expansions
of trade and production. On the one hand, capitalist organizations and individuals respond to the accumulation of capital over and above what can be reinvested profitably in established channels of trade and production by holding in liquid form a growing proportion of their incoming cash flows. This tendency creates an overabundant mass of liquidity that can be mobilized directly or through intermediaries in speculation, borrowing, and lending. On the other hand, territorial organizations respond to the tighter budget constraints that ensue from the slowdown in the expansion of trade and production by competing intensely with one another for the capital that accumulates in financial markets. This tendency brings about massive, systemwide redistributions of income and wealth from all kinds of communities to the agencies that control mobile capital, thereby inflating and sustaining the profitability of financial deals largely divorced from commodity trade and production. All systemwide financial expansions, past and present, are the outcome of the combined if uneven development of these two complementary tendencies (Arrighi, 1994, 1997).
The recurrent tendency of capital to regain flexibility by shedding its commodity form in favor of its money form witnesses, in Braudel’s words, “a certain unity in capitalism, from thirteenth-century Italy to the present-day West” (1982, 433). Nevertheless, this unity is not at all the expression of a structural invariance of historical capitalism. On the contrary, it is the expression of a basic instability and adaptability. For in each and every financial expansion, world capitalism has been reorganized ever more fundamentally under a new leadership. This has been the case of the earlier financial expansions—when world capitalism was still embedded in a system of city-states and transnational business diasporas—and of the later expansions, when world capitalism came to be embedded in a system of national states and world-encompassing business communities and organizations (Arrighi, 1994, 13-16, 74-84, 235-38, 330-31).
Financial expansions concern us here exclusively as moments of structural transformation of the modern system of sovereign national states. As different chapters of the book will show, they have been an integral aspect of hegemonic crises and the eventual transformation of these crises into hegemonic breakdowns. This transformation is portrayed in figure 2 by the emergence of “systemic chaos” out of the interplay of intensifying interstate and interenterprise competition,
escalating social conflicts, and the interstitial emergence of new configurations of power.
By systemic chaos we understand a situation of severe and seemingly irremediable systemic disorganization. As competition and conflicts escalate beyond the regulatory capacity of existing structures, new structures emerge interstitially and destabilize further the dominant configuration of power. Disorder tends to become self-reinforcing, threatening to provoke or actually provoking a complete breakdown in the system’s organization.
Financial expansions have a contradictory impact on this tendency. On the one hand, they hold it in check by temporarily inflating - the power of the declining hegemonic state. As the “autumn” of major ■ capitalist developments, financial expansions are also the autumn of — the hegemonic structures in which these developments are embedded. ....
They are the time when the leader of a major expansion of world trade and production that is drawing to a close reaps the fruits of its leader- • ship in the form of a privileged access to the overabundant liquidity that accumulates in world financial markets. This privileged access en- ables the declining hegemonic state to contain, at least for a time, the forces that challenge its continuing dominance.
On the other hand, financial expansions strengthen these same forces by widening and deepening the scope of interstate and interenterprise competition and social conflict, and by reallocating capital to emergent structures that promise greater security or higher returns than the dominant structure. Declining hegemonic states are thus faced with the Sisyphean task of containing forces that keep rolling — forth with ever renewed strength. Sooner or later, even a small distur- « bance can tik the balance in favor of the forces that wittingly or un- - wittingly are undermining the already precarious stability of existing • structures, thereby provoking a breakdown of systemic organization. •
Hegemonic breakdowns are the decisive turning points of hegemonic transitions. They are the time when the systemic organization that had been put in place by the declining hegemonic power disintegrates and systemic chaos sets in. But they are also the time when new hegemonies are forged (see figure z).
Increasing systemic disorganization curtails the collective power * of the system’s dominant groups. And the greater the curtailment, the more widely and deeply felt the demand for system-level governance. Nevertheless, this demand can be satisfied and a new hegemony can
emerge only if increasing systemic disorganization is accompanied by the emergence of a new complex of governmental and business agencies endowed with greater system-level organizational capabilities than those of the preceding hegemonic complex. The breakdown of any given hegemonic order is ultimately due to the fact that the increase in the volume and dynamic density of the system outgrows the organizational capabilities of the particular hegemonic complex that had created the conditions of the systemic expansion. Ultimately, therefore, the ensuing self-reinforcing disorder can be overcome, and the conditions of a new systemic expansion can be created, only if a new complex emerges that is endowed with greater systemic capabilities than the old hegemonic complex.
Historically, the same processes that have generated systemic chaos have also generated the greater concentration of systemic capabilities that, in combination with systemic chaos, eventually resulted in the establishment of a new hegemony. As the rising hegemon leads the system in the direction of greater cooperation among the system’s units, while drawing them onto its own path of development, systemic chaos •• subsides and a new hegemonic cycle begins. But each cycle differs from - the preceding one in two main respects: the greater concentration of organizational capabilities wielded by the hegemonic state in compari- son with its predecessor, and the higher volume and dynamic density of the system that is being reorganized by the hegemonic state.
Our model thus describes a pattern of recurrence (hegemony leading to expansion, expansion to chaos, and chaos to a new hegemony), which is also a pattern of evolution (each new hegemony reflecting a greater concentration of organizational capabilities and a higher vol- | ume and density of the system than the preceding hegemony). This | double pattern concerns past hegemonic transitions. To the extent that we can detect it also in present transformations of the global political ’ economy, we gain some insight into their likely future trajectories.
As our account of past hegemonic transitions will show, however, the reproduction of this pattern over the centuries has been as much a matter of historical contingency as systemic necessity. Moreover, the very evolution of the system has made the reproduction of the pattern more problematic than it was in the past. The purpose of establishing analogies between present and past transformations, therefore, is also to identify differences in historical and systemic circumstances that can be expected to make the outcome of present transformations diverge from that of past hegemonic transitions. The more we succeed in specifying these differences, the less indeterminate our speculations about the future will be. But no matter how successful we are, some degree of indeterminacy remains the distinguishing characteristic of systemic change, both past and present.
The four central chapters of this book have a common purpose and format. They all analyze and compare the modern world’s two complete hegemonic transitions—from Dutch to British hegemony and from British to U.S. hegemony—as moments of systemic transformation, an understanding of which may throw some light on the dynamics of the present transition from U.S. hegemony to a yet unknown destination. The first part of each chapter analyzes the transition from Dutch to British hegemony; the second part analyzes the transition from British to U.S. hegemony in comparison with the earlier transition; and the concluding section discusses the implications of the analysis for an understanding of present transformations.
What differentiates the chapters are the particular angles of vision from which hegemonic transitions are analyzed. These angles correspond to the four controversial issues about present transformations discussed in the first part of this introduction. Chapter i (“Geopolitics and High Finance”) focuses on the processes that have led to the displacement of one hegemonic state by another. Chapter z (“The Transformation of Business Enterprise”) focuses on the changing relationship between the governmental and business organizations of hegemonic states. Chapter 3 (“The Social Origins of World Hegemonies” ) focuses on the role of social change and conflict in shaping world hegemonies. And chapter 4 (“Western Hegemonies in World- Historical Perspective”) focuses on the changes in the interciviliza- tional balance of power that have been associated with hegemonic transitions.
The common purpose and different angles of vision of the book’s chapters have implications that should be borne in mind to avoid misunderstandings. First, the processes analyzed in the different chapters have been selected for their bearing on the dynamics of systemic change, both past and present. Many of these processes are unit-level processes in the sense that they originate in the actions of specific governments, enterprises, and social groups and unfold in specific locations. Our interest in unit-level processes, however, is strictly limited to
the role they play as a source of systemic change in hegemonic transitions. Whether our analysis of these processes from this particular perspective has produced any new knowledge in the separate fields of study from which we have drawn our facts and interpretations is up to the specialists of those fields to judge. Our only claim is to have produced an analytical construct capable of shedding new light on systemlevel structural change in the modern world, both past and present.
Second, all the chapters analyze the same two hegemonic transitions. But each highlights a different spatio-temporal feature of these two transitions depending on its particular angle of vision. The processes on which the various chapters focus are interrelated but not synchronous—some start or end earlier than others and they do not all go through the same phases. Nor are their primary locations the same. The most salient processes unfold in some regions of the system but not in others, or they unfold differently in different regions. As a result, the narratives of the different chapters are not fully synchronized, nor are they always focused on the same regions. Our contention is that this spatio-temporal unevenness among processes is itself a property of hegemonic transitions, which deserves as much attention as any other property.
Finally, although each chapter tells a different story about the dynamics of hegemonic transitions, the stories are interrelated and form a totality that has a meaning of its own. These interrelationships are underscored at the beginning and end of each chapter and synthesized in the book’s conclusions, where the four controversial issues from which we started are reexamined in the light of the overall dynamic of past hegemonic transitions. This dynamic would, of course, look different had it been reconstructed from a different set of angles of vision. We nonetheless hope that our reconstruction can dissipate some of the global fog that Hobsbawm, with good reason, sees surrounding us as we tap our way into the third millennium.