**Summary**

Peasant struggles against the expansion of the extractive frontier. Imperialist Mining and Class Conflict in Cajamarca, Peru

This work on the Peruvian mining and anti-mining conflict is framed in a historical political sociology that converses with Latin American Marxism and anti-imperialist thought, affirming the validity of the mining problem as configurative of the post-colonial condition and the situation of imperialist domination in Peru. In this sense, the anti-mining struggles of the 21st century bring back a fundamental and phantasmagorical problem on which an apocalypse is built for the international mining bourgeoisie. Mining in the so-called "West Indies", that is, in America in general, is a method of colonization and the historical foundation of capitalist accumulation on a global scale. It is through the dispossession, enslavement and super-exploitation of the pre-capitalist indigenous peasantry that this highly priced metallic commodity increases its surplus value in foreign trade and becomes capital. Mining is a process of capitalist production and accumulation central to the development of the global capitalist system, and the development of the expressions of political conflict produced by its relations of production thus constitute a central contentious field in the process of class struggle. Not necessarily for the control of the mines as means of production, but to prevent the reproduction of extractive mining capital and to protect water and land, as essential values for the reproduction of life and for the social reproduction of the peasantry in particular. The geoeconomic and political relevance of the anti-mining conflict on a global scale is preceded not only by the history of colonial mining but also by the the struggles of miners labor unions against the imperialist development of monopoly capital implanted since the beginning of the twentieth century, fundamentally extractive, financial and predominantly from USA. From the 21st century onwards, it is the popular peasant movement that protests against the mining contamination and destruction of water and land. This thesis aims to highlight the centrality of the current mining conflict for the development of the class struggle on a national, regional and global scale.

Key words: Mining conflict. Anti-mining conflict. Imperialism. Peasantry. Latin America. Peru. Cajamarca.