# Conclusions: The indigenous-cholo peasantry struggles against imperialist mining as an antisystemic movement

\subsection{The indigenous-cholo peasantry struggles against imperialist mining as an antisystemic movement}```pseudo
	\begin{algorithm}
	\caption{Algo Caption}
	\begin{algorithmic}

	\end{algorithmic}
	\end{algorithm}
```

The location of this antisystemic historical resistance in Los Andes is indigenous in its broad base, structurally placed in subordination by the negative dialectics of race, which created the international division of labor by the material expansion of the competitive semi-colonial policy for mining exploitation, trade, and hoarding of merchant capitals in its attempted transition toward the formation of the oligarchic financial bourgeoisies which held the modern world-system under four successive Western inner-transitions since the XVI century.

Antimining struggles in Los Andes antagonize these reproduction processes and mechanisms vital for the modern world-system, and the imperialist world-economy. If Andean mining struggles decreases the imperialist mining bourgeoisies's rate of profit, it's antisystemic effects should have differentiated consequences on the multilevel polity contention among the imperialist bourgeoisies ruling the U.S. and the imperialist bourgeoisie ruling China for the expansion of its circuit of capital accumulation. At the current breakdown of the modern world-system shared imperialism of Sino-American finance capital, centralized during the '70s with differentiated accumulation regimes ruling their capital concentration until the 2000s when began its decentralization process.

The differentiated reproduction outcomes obtained by concrete finance capitalists from the rate of profit depend on the natural and cultural production conditions expressed in the organic and technical compositions of capital at each instance of the whole circuit of capital reproduction. The differentiation mechanism operating at the level of the rate of profit depends on the transformation of surplus-value into profit at a concrete time of circulation and expected proportions of variable and constant capital consumption given by the natural, cultural, and -as I argue here- by the historical conditions manifested in the Andean indigenous-cholo antimining struggles as historical challengers formed with the constitution of the modern world-system and the reproduction processes of the capitalist world-economy. And also, by the precedent repartition of that super-profit exploited in its components: interest, profit, and rent.

The antimining peasants’ struggles in the Andes of South America effectively obstruct the conversion of the money invested as mining productive capital by different imperialist bourgeoisies in competition for the extension of its reproduction circuit scale. Employing its militarized policy over the territories cursed by the abundance of mineral commodities under different forms of militarism, as military and paramilitary interventions in Latin America, or as new imperialist wars as initially expressed in Ukraine and Palestine (or sooner Taiwan) ongoing multilevel polity conflicts.

The processes of production and circulation of mining imperialist productive capital had been challenged before by proletarian mining workers' struggles in China at the coal and lead mines of Anyuan, Pinghsiang County (Kiangsi Province) and Shuikoushan, Changning (Hunan Province) between 1922 and 1927; as well as in Peru in episodes of mining contention identified as the massacres of Malpaso (1930), Toquepala (1966), and Cobriza (1971). Nevertheless, the cooperation between the peasants' movement and the proletarian mining workers in China developed in the betrayed democratic revolution of 1927, and the further national resistance against Japanese and U.S. imperialism. 

In contrast, the extension of the peasants-workers revolutionary coalition is a matter of polemic between historians of the peasants' movement and mining worker's struggles in Peru. The development of the peasantry as a class for itself sparked at the final decades of the XX century, the indigenous rebellion in Ecuador of 1991 and the Chiapas liberation by the EZLN in 1994, which preceded the resistance against the expansion of the mining extractive frontier accelerated since the first years of the XXI century.

The antimining struggles of the Andean indigenous peasantry are historically grounded in the problem of land. The dispossession and destruction of vital values for the social reproduction of the peasantry and the rural proletariat as the soil and water, by the expansion of the mining extractive frontier is unreconcilable with the existence not only of the peasantry but for the reproduction of the rural proletariat surrounding the imperialist mining enclave. 

The territories cursed by the mining industry are objects of total biodiversity extermination due to the destruction of the conditions for life in general, and not only the cultural or natural conditions for peasant economies. The expansion of the imperialist policy over values as the natural sources for commodities production, transportation infrastructure, and gold hoarded, rather than sole money-capital is in dispute by imperialist military interventions and imperialist wars, by which certain monopolistic finance capital destroy the productive capital of the rival imperialists bourgeoisies, expanding in that manner its circuit of reproduction and restructuring the relations of production of the world economy and, therefore, the world-class structure from which that victorious imperialists bourgeoisies pursues alienation by its systemic-metabolic processes of capital production and circulation. Given the advanced development of its compulsive, and currently contradictory mechanisms of concentration and centralization of capital.

Although past mining contention waves of antisystemic resistance occurred during transitional stages of the capitalist modern world-system development -i.e. as the mining proletariat struggles developed in Peru and Great Britain during the first quarter of the 1900s-, the current restructuration attempt of the modern capitalist world-economy not only depend on a completed transition in the afterward of U.S. hegemony breakdown. 

Due to the advanced symptoms of the overaccumulation crisis and its attempted resolution, first through the liberalization of the gold price out of the financial institutions of Bretton Woods in 1971 (Fig. 1), and then through the extension of the mining extractive frontier particularly of gold production motivated by the demand of monetary gold holdings for national reserve’s banks exponentially since 2001; the tendency to accumulate monetary gold in national reserves that was strongly monopolistic under U.S. financial capital until the beginning of the new millennia began to be followed not only by the European central banks but also by Russia, India, and specifically China. 

The last mentioned state capitalist trust increased its acquisition of gold for its national reserves, as its superiority in monetary holdings compared to the U.S. (Fig. 2) required a balance in proportion to its monetary-gold holdings (Fig.3) to overcome the U.S. dollar as hegemonic currency, and intensified its capital production by gold mining in national contexts under which the situation of Sino-American shared imperialism remains, as in Latin America.

The formation of the bases for the Sino-American finance capital's centralization developed gradually, triggered by the Sino-Soviet secession and the resolution of the Vietnam imperialist war, until the first years of the XXI century. By the 11S attacks on Wall Street, the Pentagon, and the White House.

When, under conditions of shared imperialism, these finance capitals appeared to strengthen a process of decentralization opposite to the operation of its finance capitals across the borders of China and U.S. "nationalization" as industrial capital sharing in that manner the accumulation conditions for its consensed competition. The decentralization of the Sino-American finance capitals has differentiated effects for the circuit of accumulation of each imperialist bourgeoisies depending on its particular current levels of concentration and centralization. 

Also, the world-scale effects of the advanced decentralization of the Sino-American finance capitals exhibit differentiated consequences over the processes of production and circulation, shaping its transitional formation into the next international division of labor; hegemonic imperialist state; identities, tactics and strategies of class struggle; and future but soon present geo-economical territoriality of the capitalist world-economy configured by the results of the multilevel polity contention of imperialist competition involving imperialist wars (Ukraine, Palestine, and soon Taiwan) and imperialist militarism interventions as are developing in Latin America. 

Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru, Chile, Venezuela, Argentina, and Brazil's political regimes were destabilized by several attempts to stop the development of the populist and left electoral tide, by the typical preparation of coups d'etat transparently certified by the official U.S. imperialists bourgeoisies's bureaucracy official located in each of those countries minus Venezuela: the U.S. Ambassadors. The total reserves of China in 2021 (3,43 trillion US dollars) are 4.79 times the volume of total reserves of the U.S. for the same year (716,15 billion US dollars) (Fig.1). However, the U.S. total gold reserves for the same last year 2021 was of 475,95 billion, and China’s total gold reserves only ascend to 114,01 billion (0,114 trillion) (Fig.2).

A long twentieth century of imperialism over gold mining countries holds a current U.S. high advantage in monetary gold holdings, which implies a non-actually completed transition to China as a new hegemonic state of global capitalism. mining and mining struggles against U.S. gold mining and China copper mining in Peru evidenced a complex dynamic of imperialist mining from which approaches of U.S. hegemonic crisis and the initiation of a fifth systemic cycle of accumulation with “Chinese characteristics” can be problematized beyond.

In the current critical juncture of capitalism's systemic chaos (Arrighi and Silver 1999), mining struggles in the Andes and Latin America take an anti-imperialistic and antisystemic role. To initiate a fifth systemic cycle of accumulation, the transnational capitalist class requires investing the enormous magnitude of money-capital already accumulated in the branches of industry where larger profits can be obtained.  Until new industries or future technological innovations could offer larger profits to the TCC, their productive capital will be located intensively in the branches of industry they know can provide larger profit returns, as mining. A new material expansion phase is a necessary condition for another cycle of financial expansion, but this time the extended accumulation circuit mechanism could be reaching its natural limits. Not only climate change but also historical change constrains and obstructs capitalism reconstitution at the present.

Until the beginning of the Twenty First century, the rising tide of environmental struggles carried out by peasant mobilization against the imperialist mining bourgeoisie takes particular relevance to the development of class struggle in general. As an industry of larger profits, mining is monopolized by the TCC across colonial and imperialist mining periods, making mining a post-colonial element of the political economy of Andean societies. Mining is a feature of the indigenous peasantry class foundation that goes beyond coloniality and imperialism, which with other elements of indigenous and cholo political syncretism flow in conjunction with new historical processes of class struggle, technological innovation and interstate competition for mobile capital.

Mining industry, taken as a large-profitable investment for capital accumulation by imperialist bourgeoisies, exhibits clearly the other side of extended reproduction, the militarized dimension of capital accumulation actualizes today in the repression of indigenous peasants mining struggles. In this sense, mining struggles require study as a priority field of contention for class struggle development in the Andean region, considering their position in the mines of the capital accumulation circuit in a period in which financial capital requires another phase of material expansion. The realization of another cycle of capital accumulation -a more profitable one for capitalist reproduction- actually depends on their highly profitable industries to take a big breath by the circulation of money capital into productive capital (MCM'). 

Indeed, mining struggles grow as limits to capital accumulation and imperialist domination in the Andes, in Latin America and at a global scale. O'Connor (1984) tried to remind to other radical thinkers in the middle of the 80's, that Marxist theorists “left few clues regarding possible 'external barriers' to capitalist accumulation in the form of either 'limits to growth' determined by the availability of natural resources or [...] limits to accumulation determined by cultural-ideological conditions of economic and social reproduction” (O´Connor 1984:6). Environmental socialist struggles, as he would also state, are a central field of contention "to combat the attempt by capital and the state to ideologically construct and politically use the current crisis to restructure economic, political, and social life with the sole purpose of renewed capitalist accumulation, including a new 'long wave' of ideological innovation” (O'Connor 1984:23). Nevertheless, the material challenge that environmental socialist struggles display over militarized accumulation, as in antimining struggles in the Andes, show a further development of the ideological struggles mentioned by James O'Connor. **POR importar y latearconx++

