Andean antimining struggles and their antisystemic obstruction of capital reproduction. The indigenous-cholo peasantry challenges to the international bank state capitalists trusts at the breakdown of Sino-American shared imperialism
Abstract
The metabolic structural processes of the capitalist world-economy have produced historical antisystemic resistances with world-scale effects over capital extended reproduction. In this article, we explain the world-scale effects of antimining struggles in Los Andes over the capital reproduction circuit of imperialist bank state capitalists trusts in competition under the breakout conditions of Sino-American shared imperialism from three case studies: i) the cholo-peasantry antimining struggles in Cajamarca (Peru) during the 2004 and 2011-2012 against the Newmont Gold Mining Corporation headed in the U.S., ii) the indigenous-peasantry mining struggles in Apurimac (Peru) during 2015 and 2019 against the MMG of China Minmetals Corporation (CMC), and iii) the indigenous-cholo peasantry antimining struggles in Cotopaxi (Ecuador) during 2023-2024 against the Atico Mining Corporation headed in Canada. The theory-building case studies conducted have been nurtured by fieldwork, archive research, and protest event data analysis to show the consistency of the hypothesis proposed.
Keywords: Peru; Ecuador; China; United States of America; Canada; Antimining struggles; Antisystemic movements; Capital reproduction; Gold; Shared imperialism.
1.	Introduction
The antisystemic effects of the antimining movement in Los Andes express the advanced development of class struggle with the identity formation of historical challengers in absolute contradiction to the reproduction of the imperialist’s bourgeoisies finance capital through the mining circuit of accumulation. Mining in Los Andes is at the core of the foundational processes of the modern world-system and in the metabolic processes of reproduction of finance capital in the current world-economy. The development of the processes of production and circulation of colonial and imperialist mining, and gold mining in particular, have structured the social formation and historical resistance of the indigenous-cholo peasantry, against militarism, dispossession, and expansive destruction of the vital values for their social reproduction: water and land.
This is evidenced by the genocide of the “indigenous” peoples of Abya Yala, the exploitation of the survivors in colonial mining, as well as the massacres of their proletarianized children and grandchildren indigenous-cholo peasants by the imperialist implantation of U.S. monopolist capitalists trusts’ finance capital inter-“nationalized” on mining enclaves in Los Andes. Militarism as a policy of expansion of the imperialists bourgeoisies to control or guarantee the functioning of the mining circuit for the reproduction of their finance capital, is a persistent feature of the coloniality of the current mining problem. As well as a nodal point of his antiimperialist solution in Los Andes. In the origine of the formation of the modern world-system that began in the sixteenth century and in the world-economy of imperialism development during the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, the massacres and exploitation of the indigenous-cholo proletarianized peasantry in the mines of Los Andes operated as a constant under colonial mining and imperialist mining.
Colonial mining in Los Andes was the foundational method of the expanded original accumulation of the sixteenth century (Cueva [1977]1999:63-78; Marx [1886]1976:874-875,915) corresponding to the material expansion of the European oligarchic banking bourgeoisies (Arrighi 1994) that emerged from the concentration of merchant capital in the Middle East during the thirteenth century (Abu-Lughod 1991), shaping the modern world-system. Imperialist mining is a vital process of production and hoarding for the extended reproduction of finance capitals with differentiated trajectories of centralization and concentration (Bukharin [1929]1966) guaranteeing their inter-“nationalization” through militarism (Luxemburg [1913]2015).
In their effort to conceptualize the antisystemic effects of the movements produced by the systemic structural processes of the world-economy, Arrighi, Hopkins, and Wallerstein (1989:90) treated the antisystemic effects as caused by the centralization of capital as a world-scale tendency highly developed under the world-economy of imperialism, and highlighted the divergence of the potentially challenging [new] social sites2 of the antisystemic movements. However, the causal mechanisms that connect the constitution of antisystemic identities in absolute antagonism with the metabolic need for expansive reproduction of contending finance capitals with differentiated trajectories of centralization and concentration have not yet been shown.
As the events presented, the emergence of new challengers with not only abstract but absolute antagonistic identities appears as reminders of the development of the history of class struggle. We build a hypothesis of causal mechanisms to answer the question: How do the anti-mining struggles produce anti-systemic effects on the capital reproduction of imperialist bourgeoisies? We argue that the antisystemic effects of historical challengers formed by the expansive structural processes vital for the reproduction of competing finance capitals under conditions of shared imperialism in Los Andes, are real in their consequences.
Antimining struggles have world-scale effects over the decreasing of the rate of profit of the top-layer of the imperialists bourgeoisies, the inter-“national” bank state capitalists trusts3 by: the obstruction of the circulation time in the transformation of surplus value into profit, as well as disrupting the advanced capital organic composition of the imperialist bourgeoisies investing in the mining reproduction circuit of accumulation, over the state capitalist’s trusts gold-money-capital hoarding and trade. The effects of antimining struggles on the metabolic mechanisms of capital reproduction are antisystemic, also because its absolute antagonist contestation exacerbates the imperialistic competence for material expansion facing a forthcoming re-partition imperialists wars.
We state the following hypothesis: the Indigenous-cholo historical antisystemic resistances formed with, and in antagonism to, the systemic structural processes vital for extended capital reproduction are real by its effects4. The antimining struggles have antisystemic effects by decreasing the rate of profit of top-layer-class of the world-economy of imperialism expected to revenue through the circuit of mining accumulation, by effectively blocking its capital circulation with obstructive performances of struggle. In that manner, delaying its circulation time and disrupting the expected organic composition of finance capital advanced in the production of surplus-value, shaped as a mass of mining-commodity-capital, and its posterior metamorphosis into total super-profit.
Indigenous-cholo antimining struggles, indeed, triggers gold hoarding by imperialists bank state trusts, because gold-holdings are money-capital and commodity-capital at the same time. But in contrast with monetized-capital in form of paper-money -pure currency-, gold-money-capital hold its surplus-value form of commodity-capital. And in that manner, its transformation in profit can be delayed when the rate of profit decreases. As we will explain here onward, because of the delay in the circulation of the finance capital of the international bank capitalists state trusts, the antisystemic obstruction of antimining struggles trigger the raising of the constant capital magnitude of its organic capital composition, amplifying its decreasing effect in the rate of profit, and consequently a reduced amount of surplus-value is transformed into total profit. Indeed, disrupting the production of surplus value and the rate of profit expected by the imperialists bourgeoisies in ongoing militarist competition for the expansion of their mining accumulation circuits by means of imperialist wars or imperialists interventions oriented to establish its relations of production on the “national-economies” in which the mining precious “raw” materials are situated as in Los Andes or Palestine.
2.	Antisystemic resistance of historical challengers: the antimining movement of the indigenous-cholo Andean peasantry
The formation of the class structure of the modern world-system is founded on the racialized international division of labor produced by colonization as a policy of expansion of merchant capital. Around ten million “indigenous" survived the genocide planned in Los Andes of an estimated total of sixty five million exterminated over the continental “America", being sublimated as inferior beings and reduced to mere labor force by the colonization method of primitive accumulation (Marx [1886]1976:873- 875, 914; Mariategui, January 16, 1929:78; Quijano and Wallerstein 1992; Quijano [1999], 2007, 169-170; Mignolo 2011, 183-84).
The world no longer fit into the consciousness of the survivors. But in their collective consciousness a myth survived. Or a myth makes sense in our consciousness, it is the myth of the new indigenous, of the Inkarri (the Inka return), of the Yawar-Inti (Sun of Blood) and the resurgence of the “indigenous" world by a revolutionary vendetta. In opposition to Arboleda's (2020) interpretation of the formation of indigenous “identity politics"5, I argue that the revolutionary subjectivity that conjures up indigenous socialism is a historical formation in movement, a block of living historical text clashing, developing the peasantry as an antagonist class in formal subsumption since the sixteenth century.
For both Arboleda (2020) and Bolívar Echevarria, the indigenous peoples could not understand the antagonism between them and the Spaniards. Their cosmology, they believe, did not allow the indigenous to realize that they were being killed by an external collective antagonistic to their lives or “collective self”. If someone follows that argument, by implication this indigenous “self-defeating cultural essentialisms” would only change with the later appropriation of Hegelian logic as the basement for the reproduction of the sublimating rationality of “European mentality". By implication, it is since the encounter of the “indigenous” peoples with this “European mentality” that their descendants are able to interpret “the cultural other in terms of radical otherness, as an absolute negation of its own identity”. In short, it must be understood that Bolívar Echevarria should have ideologically omitted the work of the Peruvian anthropologist Luis E. Valcarcel, so as not to force an approximation to the work of Jose Carlos Mariategui, who found an indigenous revolutionary subject already in motion when they were going to work on its politicization at the beginning of the twentieth century. Fortunately, the work of Alberto Flores Galindo ([1985]2010) did justice to this problem by tracing the myth of the Inkarri in indigenous and popular struggles emblematic of the history of Peru.
As the first worker-intellectuals became the prophets of this myth, indigenous socialism was forged in the early twentieth century as the convergence of the “cholo group" with the indigenous peasantry in historical resistance. The work of socialist politicization undertaken by Mariátegui, Mayer and Valcarcel (among others) in the organization of the bases of socialism in Peru and in the creation of indigenous socialism, they found already in motion the myth of indigenous resurgence. In which framework of interpretation, the revolution is carried out as vendetta for the new indigenous, their remnants, their sons and grandsons. The socialist revolution as a movement and horizon was already operating in Los Andes, when El Amauta Jose Carlos Mariátegui and the cholo group which he constituted with other intellectual workers of the proletariat in formation, began their work of politicization.
Mariátegui wrote in the prologue to Valcarcel's Tempest in Los Andes (1927): “I remember the unexpected and impressive type of agitator I found four years ago in the indigenous from Puno, Ezequiel Urviola. This meeting was the greatest surprise that Peru had in store for me on my return from Europe. Urviola represented the first spark of a fire that was to come. He was the revolutionary indigenous, the socialist indigenous. Tuberculous, hunchbacked, he succumbed after two years of tireless work. Today it does not matter that Urviola does not exist. It is enough that he existed. As Valcarcel says, today the mountains are pregnant with spartacus" (Mariategui in the prologue to Valcarcel 1927:11).
The history of the class struggle in Los Andes definitely precedes socialism, but most important, the indigenous-cholo peasantry learned to instrumentalize it. Thus, by the first quarter of the twenty-first century, the indigenous-cholo peasantry has not only effectively instrumentalized socialism (and Marxism) but also environmentalism (Mejía 2021; 2024), fixing its discursive articulation on the recognition of sensitive entities such as mountains, rivers, and lagoons (de la Cadena 2010). As De la Cadena emphasized about the visionary work of Jose María Arguedas: “[t]he totality, Todas las Sangres proposed an alternative indigenous social movement, a critical ally of the modern left, but with its own a-modern hybrid logic. Literacy and modern politics were important, but they had to be used and translated selectively, rather than eradicating indigenous customs" (2005:18).
Hybridity in this sense is performative and not a reproduction of Western modernization as acculturation, but rather the cholos as indigenous descendants have been building their own cultural logic that recognizes their origins, while appropriating Western-modern cultural objects, as we do with the socialist and ecological frames of interpretation in the antimining and mining struggles of the twenty-first century. As evidence the three case studies: i) the cholo-peasantry antimining struggles in Cajamarca (Peru) during 2004 and 2011-2012 against the Newmont Gold Mining Corporation headed in the U.S., ii) the indigenous-peasantry mining struggles in Apurimac (Peru) during 2015 and 2019 against the MMG of China Minmetals Corporation (CMC), and iii) the indigenous-cholo peasantry antimining struggles in Cotopaxi (Ecuador) during 20232024 against the Atico Mining Corporation headed in Canada. The cholo-indigenous peasantry updated their interpretation of mining from a class perspective, nurtured by ecological discourses and indigenous cosmopolitics (de la Cadena 2020) in the defense of water, land, life and biodiversity.
2.1. The Historical Resistance of the Cholo-Indigenous Peasant Struggles Against Imperialist Mining in Los Andes
Imperialist mining is a central productive and hoarding process for the extended capital reproduction of the most advanced economic formations of the imperialism world-economy in competition for their inter-“nationalization".7 Although the institutional and military foundations of imperialist domination in Los Andes were settled with the implantation of the monopolistic finance capital of the most centralized bank capitalists state trusts of the U.S., through extractive enclaves on the most profitable industries in semi-feudal and semi-colonial “national-economies” during the period 1895 to 1930. From the beginning of the twentieth century, the mining industry in Los Andes was under the almost exclusive control of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie. Mining was one of the industries where capitalism developed most rapidly, especially in Los Andes, where from 1895 monopoly capital was directed toward large-scale mining, oil production, and agriculture (Mariategui [1928]2011:245-249; Cueva [1977]1999:63-64; Quijano [1977]1988:114-121).                               
In fact, the struggles of the central Peruvian highlands mining workers unions were executing active antisystemic resistance since their genesis with the first miners strike against the Cerro de Pasco Corporation (CPC) of January 7, 1919 -inspired in the advancements of the proletariat in Europe and the Soviet Revolution of October 1917 (Melgar Bao 2020:132)- until the end of the 1980s. The processes of union formation and politicization of the mining proletariat of the central highlands of Peru went through a trajectory of radicalization during most of the twentieth century. This trajectory of radicalization diffused to the medium and small mines at the national level, as well as to the mines of the Southern highlands -as was evidenced by the massacres of 1957 and 1966 in the mines of Toquepala (Moquegua), exploited by the Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC)-. Mines opened for the “nationalization" of the finance capital of the U.S. imperialist bourgeoisie through the Cuajone contract, secretly signed by the “nationalist" military government of Velasco Alvarado.
While during the 1980s, the co-optation of the mining workers unions of the Southern Peru Copper Corporation (SPC) was consolidated as a result of the enforcement of its institutionalization trajectory. Meanwhile, the intensity and harshness of the militarism executed against the protests of the mining workers in the central Peruvian highlands exploited by the Cerro de Pasco Copper Corporation (CPC), evidenced the disruptiveness of the transgression carried out by the mining workers struggles as a direct challenge to the main reproduction circuit of capital accumulation. The systematic application of militarism is the sole guarantee to hold its imperialist policy over the mines of the central highlands of Peru was evidenced in the massacres of Malpaso (1930), Cobriza (1971), as well as the militarized repression of the miners' strike campaign of the mid-80s repressed with the imprisonment of hundreds of unionized miners, and the assassination of Saul Cantoral in 1988 by the “Commando Rodrigo Franco" task force (a paramilitary criminal organization for annihilation that operated under the first government of Alan Garcia).
However, the radicalization of the miners' strikes developed facing militarized repression and military regimes. The formation of a vanguard of the Peruvian proletariat in open confrontation with the U.S. imperialist mining bourgeoisie, developed until the 1980s, when the Communist Party of Peru - Sendero Luminoso (PCP-SL) and the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) began armed struggles. The trajectory of radicalization of the struggles of the miners became an anti-imperialist challenge, operated in a context characterized by the escalation of the armed struggle in Latin America, by the consequences of the Sino-Soviet secession, and the resolution of the imperialists wars between the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.. The formation of the basis for the horizontal centralization of Sino-American finance capital developed, gradually after the shared imperialist resolution of the Vietnam War, and the subsequent implementation of market reforms in China by Deng XiaoPing in 1978, until the early years of the 21st century, marked by September 11 of 2001 attacks on Wall Street, the Pentagon and the White House. When, under conditions of shared imperialism, these financial capitals begin a process of separation and rupture, gradually reducing their horizontal centralization. Thus, constraining the inter-“nationalization" of U.S. bank capitals as finance capital circulating through the economic formations of China's industrial production
Indeed, U.S. and China imperialists bourgeoisies share the conditions of accumulation for their mutually consented capital concentration and inter-“nationalization" in the period between the 70s and the first decade of the 2000s, with a breaking point in the years 2013-2015, denoting a initial disentangle of their rates of profit, that could be extended mildly until 2019, with a recent affirmation between 2021 and 2023, which supposed to be reinforced with the updated data which considers the 2024 interstate contention. Considering its estimation as a proxy to the monetized-capital amount accountable for the exchange of gold-money-capital reserves as a reserve fund of surplus-value congealed under the shape of gold-commodity-capital and gold-moneycapital at the same time (Figure 4).
The finance capital advanced inter-“nationalization” of a highly centralized China state capitalists trust during the 2000s,, gradually took advantage of the institutional and military conditions established by the U.S. imperialists bourgeoisies to operate in Peru. In twenty years, China's state capitalists trust finance capital built a considerable expansion of its participation in Peruvian copper mining, although still incipient in gold mining, through the China Minmetals Corporation (CMC). The differentiated imperialists mining bourgeoisies are in the core of the inter-“nationalized” organization of finance capital, subjugating the industrial mining production of the semi-colonial “national-economies" in Los Andes, to the whole circuit of reproduction of the highest economic formations resultant from differentiated trajectories of centralization at a “national-economy" scale. Correspondent to the higher levels of capital concentration of the world-economy of imperialism, since the transition from Great Britain to the U.S. modern world-system hegemony, around the first years of the “long twentieth century" (Arrighi 1994).
Under this situation of breaking shared imperialism in Los Andes, a political regime of militarism and terrorist state violence is indiscreetly instrumentalized to guarantee the maximums rate of surplus-value and rate of profit for the top-layer economic formations at a world-scale. Nevertheless, the horizontal decentralization of Sino- American financial capital have differentiated effects for the accumulation circuit of each imperialist bourgeoisie, according to its own levels of concentration and centralization. In addition, the effects on a world-scale of the advanced horizontal decentralization of Sino-American finance capitals, exhibit differentiated consequences on the systemic structural processes of production and circulation, shaping the next transitory formation that necessarily will imply a new international division of labor.
