Max 2pp.

>**Personal History and Diversity Statement**  
UC Santa Barbara is interested in a *diverse and inclusive graduate student population*. Please describe any aspects of your *personal background, accomplishments, or achievements that you feel are important in evaluating your application for graduate study*. For example, please *describe if you have experienced economic challenges in achieving higher education, such as being financially responsible for family members or dependents, having to work significant hours during undergraduate schooling or coming from a family background of limited income*. Please *describe if you have any unusual or varied life experiences that might contribute to the diversity of the graduate group*, such as fluency in other languages, *experience living in bicultural communities*, *academic research interests focusing on cultural, societal, or educational problems as they affect underserved segments of society, or evidence of an intention to use the graduate degree toward serving disadvantaged individuals or populations*.

I was born in Lima (Peru) as a third-generation immigrant family from the Southern (Apurímac, Cusco) and Central Andes (Ancash). My grandfather grows with his mother and five brothers and sisters in an invasion formed by immigrants in the desert surrounding the wealthiest of the aristocratic beach of Ancon. Due to the hard work of my family, my two younger sibling sisters and I could finish the high school in a private catholic middle income but discriminatory and full of whiteness education institution. The costs of my privilege in high school education imply that my father never could accomplish his university degree, and the amount of debts generated to cover it for the three of us motivates my family to finally sent our apartment five years ago.

I get prepared for admission to the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos (Lima, Peru), the most important university in Peru, and the oldest one in America (funded in 1551). I reach a vacant to study my undergraduate major in Political Science at 2004, in the third cohort of a recently created department which separates as a discipline Political Science from Law, in a faculty ruled by conservative lawyers. The population of indigenous-cholo students in the university was predominant, the world were reversed for me in comparison with the high school, I wasn't discriminated any more and everyone calls everyone as comrades, all of us decide in open assemblies about collective decision and all of us can have a lunch for free in the university dinning room. I rapidly get involved in popular politics, first claiming against the far right conservative lawyers (which were at the service of the Fujimori-Montesinos competitive authoritarian regime during the 1990's decade) to pursue the employment of professors educated in social science and not only in Law. I also participate in the students struggles to defend the free food nourishment of 2500 lunches, 1800 dinners and 1800 breakfasts, the university students movement in San Marcos defends rations every year to guarantee this vital resources for the students which can't afford the cost of nourishment, most of them didn't have anyone in the city of Lima.

I had to left university for two years in 2007 to help my grandparents on the family workshop, washing cars and helping with paperwork. In 2009 I returned to accomplish my undergraduate degree. I met other non-satisfied students and we found a workshop to help each other with English language readings, vital bibliographic resources as Libgen and Sci-hub (while we didn't have database resources in that years), discuss our first drafts and worked in methodology issues by our own. With this group I created the Revista Andina de Estudios Politicos (ISSN:2221-4135) and later with other expanded collective the Instituto de Estudios Políticos Andinos (IEPA) as an effort to consolidate our hard work to imagine and create as a academic space for the development of political Andean studies, aside the hegemony sector in social science mostly composed by private university professors without interest in developing popular critical thought about politics in a public and leftist university as San Marcos. I serve as editor in the RAEP journal since their beginnings in the 2011, reaching indexation in ProQuest, ESCI (Thomson Reuters), Latindex and EBSCO, and as executive director of the IEPA from 2016-2018.

My interest in politics get out very early from the institutional and state-centered constraints of Political Science, I found the works of Charles Tilly and developed a data project to build event catalogues of protests in Peru, following his work on Great Britain and France. The theoretical and empirical understanding of the fragmentation of contentious Peruvian politics of the first years of the XXI century, pushed the publication of my first paper in co-authorship with Renzo Aurazo (Tulane University) in the peer reviewed Spanish journal Encrucijadas at the 2015. In 2014 I received the invitation of the university students of the Universidad Nacional Micaela Bastidas de Apurimac (UNAMBA) to teach as an assistant professor in their Political Science and Governability major program. I left the burocratice apparatus of the Education Ministry where I worked as another informally employed state official, and traveled to the third poorest department in Peru (Apurimac) to the encounter with the university students which had the same difficulties as I had years ago.

In 2016 I won an international scholarship offered to study at the Research Master program in Political Sociology at the Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales - Ecuador, with a proposal to research about the scale shift of anti-mining contention in the Northern Andes of Peru, at the department of Cajamarca (next to the frontier with Ecuador). I found an academic environment very different to my undergraduate university, FLACSO Ecuador is one of the better graduate colleges specialized in social science in Latin America, and as I get admitted after the pink tide government of Correa, many of the associated professors I listened and work with in FLACSO were not only critics of neoliberalism but also of the progressive XXI socialism, mainly for political ecology issues. I get close to other Latin American sociologist, historians and anthropologists, which enrich very wide my perspective about interdisciplinarity and recognized common social phenomena and popular affairs in the Andean region and Latin America more broadly.
The diversity of the international and Ecuadorian social sciences master students of FLACSO teaches me more about the quantitative and qualitative relevance of the anti-mining struggles for the broader region of Latin America and South America, and more concretely for the most of the Andean Region countries as Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and Chile. Furthermore, the lectures of my professors Valeria Coronel, Franklin Ramírez, Felipe Burbano and Ivette Vallejo push me in interesting and important academic discussions in a political time at which Ecuador was already turning far to the right. 

Ecuador and the region were already embedded in a neoliberal reversion policy, as we would recognize more materially and corporally with the repression of the government of Lenin Moreno to the masses of non-armed people mobilized in the protests initiated in October 3th of 2019 near the Wuambra Bridge of the center of the Andean city of Quito. The suppression of the subsides to petroleum based fuels would raise the prices of consumption commodities and transportation, pauperizing the already declining material life of the popular and peasant Ecuadorian people families. I was already living with my wife Mayra near in a popular neighborhood when the protest starts, so we could quickly join the mobilization. The artisanal shields used since 2011 by the agriculture workers of the Tambo´s Valley in the anti-mining struggles against the copper extraction project Tía María in the department of Arequipa (Peru), has been used to challenge the high magnitude of state violence displayed by the armed forces in the front or first lines of the brave struggles of October 2019 in Quito.

The hard to survive situations in which some of the mobilized people get involved were unexpected and we didn't had enough consciousness nor preparation to confront those situations effectively and keep with live or secure to the other comrades. The frustration caused by the absolute asymmetry of the struggle against the police and military, didn't give up the most of the people in that struggle. The scale shift mobilization process about which I wrote my political sociology master thesis was in operations without I can open my eyes because of the expired peeper gas throwed by the police, but I can felt the escalation of the mobilization in my stifle and sweat, and learn about ir also in the crying nights embraced with Mayra after contest state violence against our non-armed people for the whole day afraid of the police and military who were violating domiciles and making arbitrary detentions.

I recognized also the same historical revolutionary subjects of the Andes in movement. We received with some bread and outs to eat and drink to the indigenous peasants which arrived from their communities in the highlands of Ecuador to the center of the city of Quito traveling in trucks and trailers for 10 hours approximately. The organized multi-scale organizations of the Ecuadorian indigenous nationalities and people adapt their community historically based organization structure to the street struggle mobilizations. The logistic capacity achieved by the encounter of the indigenous movement with the feminist movement, the environmental movement, university and high school students movements, and a critical fragmented mass of diverse collectives and organizations, rapidly activated mobilization networks of solidarity strong enough to hold the protest campaign of October 2019 in Quito for more than twelve days. Until the government reestablish the fuel subsidies but kept Lenin Moreno in the presidency. We are not sure if our decision to stop to protest were the correct in that moment. We already had 9 people dead by state violence and we didn't know how to keep struggling against the military and the police with barricades, rocks and artisanal shields without continue counting more falls. The brave and rage with which the first and front lines of our Colombian peers struggles against the magnitude of state violence two years later give us an unfortunate answer, the sacrifice of more than two hundreds of comrades weren't enough for the pretentions of expansion of capital accumulation in the region.

The new indigenous is consequently a rebel with deep reasons in history for a revolution. 



