The "full development of capital [...] takes place", when "capital has posited the mode of production corresponding to it". How, or more interesting, when capital reproduction dominated human reproduction? Marx will specify what he means by the form assumed by capital in its "full development", as an initial condition described as the instance when the means of labour are introduced in the production process as fixed constant capital, as purchased commodities completely excluded from its appropriation for other aims rather than the production of profits for its owner. But, is precisely for that reason, that those means of labour as values are also constrained, "suspended in its immediate form" of use-values after being purchased by the capitalist (M-C). %%[[GNBVIIP609L1]]%%
In that sense, the means of labour became fixed capital, as are commodities under consumption, burning in its transformation process into the money-form of capital. The means of labour became fixed capital when are purchased as commodities, but are not consumed with the same velocity than human labour (variable capital). Holding their elementary form of use-values for a limited time, predictable in average, during its transformation process into money. So, considerated as constant due to its fixed turn-over time in the production stage of the circuit of capital -but, not because of that reason exempt from social accidents.
In this mode, capital oppose labour, dominating the production process also by subsuming the concrete "skillfulness of the worker" to a "technological application of science", which requires only direct labour reduced to a "mere moment of this process", to neccessarily abstract labour time. In this relation, organic for capital reproduction, the quantity of labour depend on the requirements determined by the advancement of the production forces (science); mainly given by the productivity of capital as the reduction of its variable part due to an increment of its constant part in its organic composition. Resulting, contradictory, in a rising quantity of commodity-capital produced, that contains a dimminished component of value embodied ("objectified labour") in its money-form or price.
While "labour time [...] is posited by capital as the sole determinant [...] of the creation of use-values" in the circulation process, it becames the common element shared by all the commodities as universal measure of its exchange-values. But at the same time, it is reduced quantitatively to its average as a standarized smaller proportion, and qualitatively reduced to the indispensable activity subordinated to the technical composition of capital, given by a certain social combination of labour and capital. The capital composited in social combination "appears as a natural fruit of social labour", "althought it is a historic product" of the methods of accelerated accumulation, which are the methods of primitive accumulation, extended disspossesion of the peasantry and indigenous as a sine qua non condition for the appropiation of its means of labour and of gold and silver: the alineable form of indigenous wealth correspondent to the development of merchant capital, as commodities for exchange or hoarding. %%[[GNBVIIP700L4]]%%
The subsumption of the "forces of nature" to the scientific process of labour, shaped it "as a quality of fixed capital in contrast to living labour". While being appropiated in the scientific process of capital production, individual labour becames productive as labour -socially- exchanged as an ideally measured average of neccessary labour time "represented by and concentrated in capital". So, labour as the common element of universal equivalency between commodities, also determinate the magnitude of their exchange-value as commodity-capital threw to circulation. Furthermore, the "worker's ability" to exchange is due to its circulation as capital, this means, because his exchange, as the appropiation of its product as a portion of the (variable component of) total capital advanced, is mediated by its transformation into commodity. Then the consumption of energy substances for their own reproduction as living labour, depends on its participation in the exchange process as wage-owners, as all the process of use-values exchange is mediated by money in the circuit of capital. %%[[GNBVIIP700L14]]%% "Capital in the form of circulating capital posits itself as mediator between the different workers" %%[[GBVIIP701L13]]%%.
