I am admitted to the UCSB Sociology program MA/PhD, at March 3rd I will participate in the Open House for Admitted Students. I received several emails from the chair and vice chair of the Sociology Graduate Department and I feel very excited to meet the professors and graduate students.

One of the main questions that I think they could ask to me is: 

1) Why do you want to study antimining struggles in the Andes?

Mining is at the core of capitalist development not only in South America or the Andean region but at a world-system scale. Mining was in the heart of original accumulation, and today is at the center of the fifth systemic cycle of accumulation. Antimining struggles challenge the reproduction circuit of capital by obstructing the production and commercialization of mineral commodities, impeding their realization in the foreign commerce in enlarged profits. As one of the most profitable capitalist industries, mining concentrated the productive capital of the transnational capitalist class, which is the leading fraction of global capitalism. The international mining bourgeoise is expanding the extractive frontier as a response to stagnation, using the imperialist domination in the Andes of South America to increase state violence against the indigenous peasantry, as the emerging antagonist class contesting the dispossession and destruction of land and water as vital values for their social reproduction. In this global context, the indigenous peasantry of the Andes is leading the class struggle against the transnational capitalist class intend to execute it's fifth systemic cycle of accumulation, blocking its circuit of capitalist reproduction. Indeed, antimining struggles executed by the indigenous peasantry in the Andes have antisystemic effects at a global scale obstructing the conversion of the productive capital invested by the international mining bourgeoisie -as a leading fraction of the transnational capitalist class- in enlarged profits at an advanced crisis of overaccumulation.

The dispossession and slavery of the indigenous peoples who survived the genocide initiated with the invasion of "America" were the mechanisms of what Marx called original accumulation. The first one explains the appropriation of the mines as means of production, and the second  explains the coercive mobilization of labor under formal subsumption in colonial mining. The huge volume of silver and gold mined by the coercive labor of the indigenous population realizes as surplus value and profits for the capitalists of the XVI century in a magnitude enough to finance the modern state-builiding processes in Europe and it's commerce with the East ancient world. Imperialist mining, initiated at the beginning of the XX century with the establishment of modern capitalist firms and the corresponding process of proletarization of the indigenous peasantry as miners employed by the US mining bourgeoisie.


